CHAPTER SIXTEEN 	CONVERGENCE
 1.
 
  
 
       WHEN STOR GENDIBAL FINALLY MADE OUT COMPOR’S SHIP ON HIS viewscreen, it seemed like the end of an incredibly long journey. Yet, of course, it was not the end, but merely the beginning. The journey from Trantor to Sayshell had been nothing but prologue.
 
                Novi looked awed. “Is that another ship of space, Master?”
 
                “Spaceship, Novi. It is. It’s the one we have been striving to reach. It is a larger ship than this one--and a better one. It can move through space so quickly that if it fled from us, this ship could not possibly catch it--or even follow it.”
 
                “Faster than a ship of the masters?” Sura Novi seemed appalled by the thought.
 
                Gendibal shrugged. “I may be, as you say, a master, but I am not a master in all things. We scholars do not have ships like these, nor do we have many of the material devices that the owners of those ships have.”
 
                “But how can scholars lack such things, Master?”
 
                “Because we are masters in what is important. The material advances that these others have are trifles.”
 
                Novi’s brows bent together in thought. “It seems to me that to go so quickly that a master cannot follow is no trifle. Who are these people who are wonder-having--who have such things?”
 
                Gendibal was amused. “They call themselves the Foundation. Have you ever heard of the Foundation?”
 
                (He caught himself wondering what the Hamish knew or did not know of the Galaxy and why it never occurred to the Speakers to wonder about such things. --Or was it only he who had never wondered about such things--only he who assumed that the Hamish cared for nothing more than grubbing in the soil.)
 
                Novi shook her head thoughtfully. “I have never heard of it, Master. When the schoolmaster taught me letter-lore--how to read, I mean--he told me there were many other worlds and told me the names of some. He said our Hamish world had the proper name of Trantor and that it once ruled all the worlds. He said Trantor was covered with gleaming iron and had an Emperor who was an allmaster.”
 
                Her eyes looked up at Gendibal with a shy merriment. “I unbelieve most of it, though. There are many stories the wordspinners tell in the meeting-halls in the time of longer nights. When I was a small girl, I believed them all, but as I grew older, I found that many of them were not true. I believe very few now; perhaps none. Even schoolmasters tell unbelievables.”
 
                “Just the same, Novi, that particular story of the schoolmaster is true--but it was long ago. Trantor was indeed covered by metal and had indeed an Emperor who ruled all the Galaxy. Now, however, it is the people of the Foundation who will someday rule all the worlds. They grow stronger all the time.”
 
                “They will ruleall , Master?”
 
                “Not immediately. In five hundred years.”
 
                “And they will master the masters as well?”
 
                “No, no. They will rule the worlds. We will rulethem --for their safety and the safety of all the worlds.”
 
                Novi was frowning again. She said, “Master, do these people of the Foundation have many of these remarkable ships?”
 
                “I imagine so, Novi.”
 
                “And other things that are very--astonishing?”
 
                “They have powerful weapons of all kinds.”
 
                “Then, Master, can they not take all the worlds now?”
 
                “No, they cannot. It is not yet time.”
 
                “But why can they not? Would the masters stop them?”
 
                “We wouldn’t have to, Novi. Even if we did nothing, they could not take all the worlds.”
 
                “But what would stop them?”
 
                “You see,” began Gendibal, “there is a plan that a wise man once devised--”
 
                He stopped, smiled slightly, and shook his head. “It is hard to explain, Novi. Another time, perhaps. In fact, when you see what will happen before we ever see Trantor again, you may even understand without my explaining.”
 
                “What will happen, Master?”
 
                “I am not sure, Novi. But all will happen well.”
 
                He turned away and prepared to make contact with Compor. And, as he did so, he could not quite keep an inner thought from saying: At least I hope so.
 
                He was instantly angry with himself, for he knew the source of that foolish and weakening drift of thought. It was the picture of the elaborate and enormous Foundation might in the shape of Compor’s ship and it was his chagrin at Novi’s open admiration of it.
 
                Stupid! How could he let himself compare the possession of mere strength and power with the possession of the ability to guide events? It was what generations of Speakers had called “the fallacy of the hand at the throat.”
 
                To think that he was not yet immune to its allures.
 
  
 
 2.
 
  
 
 Munn Li Compor was not in the least sure as to how he ought to comport himself. For most of his life, he had had the vision of all-powerful Speakers existing just beyond his circle of experience-- Speakers, with whom he was occasionally in contact and who had, in their mysterious grip, the whole of humanity.
 
                Of them all, it had been Stor Gendibal to whom, in recent years, he had turned for direction. It was not even a voice he had encountered most times, but a mere presence in his mind--hyperspeech without a hyper-relay.
 
                In this respect, the Second Foundation had gone far beyond the Foundation. Without material device, but just by the educated and advanced power of the mind alone, they could reach across the par. sees in a manner that could not be tapped, could not be infringed upon. It was an invisible, indetectable network that held all the worlds fast through the mediation of a relatively few dedicated individuals.
 
                Compor had, more than once, experienced a kind of uplifting at the thought of his role. How small the band of which he was one; how enormous an influence they exerted. --And how secret it all was. Even his wife knew nothing of his hidden life.
 
                And it was the Speakers who held the strings--and this one Speaker, this Gendibal, who might (Compor thought) be the next First Speaker, the more-than-Emperor of a more-than-Empire.
 
                Now Gendibal was here, in a ship of Trantor, and Compor fought to stifle his disappointment at not having such a meeting take place on Trantor itself.
 
                Couldthat be a ship of Trantor? Any of the early Traders who had carried the Foundation’s wares through a hostile Galaxy would have had a better ship than that. No wonder it had taken the Speaker so long to cover the distance from Trantor to Sayshell.
 
                It was not even equipped with a unidock mechanism that would have welded the two ships into one when the crosstransfer of personnel was desired. Even the contemptible Sayshellian fleet was equipped with it. Instead, the Speaker had to match velocities and then cast a tether across the gap and swing along it, as in Imperial days.
 
                That was it, thought Compor gloomily, unable to repress the feeling. The ship was no more than an old-fashioned Imperial vessel-- and a small one at that.
 
                Two figures were moving across the tether--one of them so clumsily that it was clear it had never attempted to maneuver through space before.
 
                Finally they were on board and removed their space suits. Speaker Stor Gendibal was of moderate height and of unimpressive appearance; he was not large and powerful, nor did he exude an air of learning. His dark, deep-set eyes were the only indication of his wisdom. But now the Speaker looked about with a clear indication of being in awehimself .
 
                The other was a woman as tall as Gendibal, plain in appearance. Her mouth was open in astonishment as she looked about.
 
  
 
 3.
 
  
 
 Moving across the tether had not been an entirely unpleasant experience for Gendibal. He was not a spaceman--no Second Foundationer was--but neither was he a complete surface worm, for no Second Foundationer was allowed to be that. The possible need for space flight was, after all, always looming above them, though every Second Foundationer hoped the need would arise only infrequently. (Preem Palver--the extent of whose space travels was legendary-- had once said, ruefully, that the measure of the success of a Speaker was the fewness of the times he was compelled to move through space in order to assure the success of the Plan.)
 
                Gendibal had had to use a tether three times before. This was his fourth use and even if he had felt tension over the matter, it would have disappeared in his concern for Sura Novi. He needed no mentalics to see that stepping into nothingness had totally upset her.
 
                “I be afeared, Master,” she said when he explained what would have to be done. “It be naughtness into which I will make footstep.” If nothing else, her sudden descent into thick Hamish dialect showed the extent of her disturbance.
 
                Gendibal said gently, “I cannot leave you on board this ship, Novi, for I will be going into the other and I must have you with me. There is no danger, for your space suit will protect you from all harm and there is no place for you to fall to. Even if you lose your grip on the tether, you will remain nearly where you are and I will be within arm’s reach so that I can gather you in. Come, Novi, show me that you are brave enough--as well as bright enough--to become a scholar.”
 
                She made no further objection and Gendibal, unwilling to do anything that might disturb the smoothness of her mind-set, nevertheless managed to inject a soothing touch upon the surface of her mind.
 
                “You can still speak to me,” he said, after they were each enclosed in a space suit. “I can hear you if you think hard. Think the words hard and clearly, one by one. You can hear me now, can’t you?”
 
                “Yes, Master,” she said.
 
                He could see her lips move through the transparent faceplate and he said, “Say it without moving your lips, Novi. There is no radio in the kind of suits that scholars have. it is all done with the mind.”
 
                Her lips did not move and her look grew more anxious: Can you hear me, Master?
 
                Perfectly well, thought Gendibal--and his lips did not move either: Do you hear me?
 
                I do, Master.
 
                Then come with me and do as I do.
 
                They moved across. Gendibal knew the theory of it, even if he could handle the practice only moderately well. The trick was to keep one’s legs extended and together and to swing them from the hips alone. That kept the center of gravity moving in a straight line as the arms swung forward in steady alternation. He had explained this to Sura Novi and, without turning to look at her, he studied the stance of her body from the set of the motor areas of her brain.
 
                For a first-timer, she did very well, almost as well as Gendibal was managing to do. She repressed her own tensions and she followed directions. Gendibal found himself, once again, very pleased with her.
 
                She was, however, clearly glad to be on board ship again--and so was Gendibal. He looked about as he removed his space suit and was rather dumbfounded at the luxury and style of the equipment. He recognized almost nothing and his heart sank at the thought that he might have very little time to learn how to handle it all. He might have to transfer expertise directly from the man already on board, something that was never quite as satisfactory as true learning.
 
                Then he concentrated on Compor. Compor was tall and lean, a few years older than himself, rather handsome in a slightly weak way, with tightly waved hair of a startling buttery yellow.
 
                And it was clear to Gendibal that this person was disappointed in, and even contemptuous of, the Speaker he was now meeting for the first time. What was more, he was entirely unsuccessful in hiding the fact.
 
                Gendibal did not mind such things, on the whole. Compor was not a Trantorian--nor a full Second Foundationer--and he clearly had his illusions. Even the most superficial scan of his mind showed that. Among these was the illusion that true power was necessarily related to the appearance of power. He might, of course, keep his illusions as long as they did not interfere with what Gendibal needed, but at the present moment, this particular illusiondid so interfere.
 
                What Gendibal did was the mentalic equivalent of a snap of the fingers. Compor staggered slightly under the impress of a sharp but fleeting pain. There was an impress of enforced concentration that puckered the skin of his thought and left the man with the awareness of a casual but awesome power that could be utilized if the Speaker chose.
 
                Compor was left with a vast respect for Gendibal.
 
                Gendibal said pleasantly, “I am merely attracting your attention, Compor, my friend. Please let me know the present whereabouts of your friend, Golan Trevize, and his friend, Janov Pelorat.”
 
                Compor said hesitantly, “Shall I speak in the presence of the woman, Speaker?”
 
                “The woman, Compor, is an extension of myself. There is no reason, therefore, why you should not speak openly.”
 
                “As you say, Speaker. Trevize and Pelorat are now approaching a planet known as Gaia.”
 
                “So you said in your last communication the other day. Surely they have already landed on Gaia and perhaps left again. They did not stay long on Sayshell Planet.”
 
                “They had not yet landed during the time I followed them, Speaker. They were approaching the planet with great caution, pausing substantial periods between micro-Jumps. it is clear to me they have no information about the planet they are approaching and therefore hesitate.”
 
                “Doyou have information, Compor?”
 
                “I have none, Speaker,” said Compor, “or at least my ship’s computer has none.”
 
                “This computer?” Gendibal’s eyes fell upon the control panel and he asked in sudden hope, “Can it aid usefully in running the ship?”
 
                “It can run the ship completely, Speaker. One need merely think into it.”
 
                Gendibal felt suddenly uneasy. “The Foundation has gone that far?”
 
                “Yes, but clumsily. The computer does not work well. I must repeat my thoughts several times and even then I get but minimal information.”
 
                Gendibal said, “I may be able to do better than that.”
 
                “I am sure of it, Speaker,” said Compor respectfully.
 
                “But never mind that for the moment. Why does it have no information on Gaia?”
 
                “I do not know, Speaker. It claims to have--as far as a computer may be said to be able toclaim --records on every human-inhabited planet in the Galaxy.”
 
                “It cannot have more information than has been fed into it and if those who did the feeding thought they had records of all such planets when, in actual fact, they had not, then the computer would labor under the same misapprehension. Correct?”
 
                “Certainly, Speaker.”
 
                “Did you inquire at Sayshell?”
 
                “Speaker,” said Compor uneasily, “there are people who speak of
 
                Gaia on Sayshell, but what they say is valueless. Clearly superstition. The tale they tell is that Gaia is a powerful world that held off even the Mule.”
 
                “Is that what they say, indeed?” said Gendibal, suppressing excitement. “Were you so sure that this was superstition that you asked for no details?”
 
                “No, Speaker. I asked a great deal, but what I have just told you is all that anyone can say. They can speak on the subject at great length, but when they have done so, all that it boils down to is what I have just said.”
 
                “Apparently,” said Gendibal, “that is what Trevize has heard, too, and he goes to Gaia for some reason connected with that--to tap this great power, perhaps. And he does so cautiously, for perhaps he also fears this great power.”
 
                “That is certainly possible, Speaker.”
 
                “And yet you did not follow?”
 
                “I did follow, Speaker, long enough to make sure he was indeed making for Gaia. I then returned here to the outskirts of the Gaian system.”
 
                “Why?”
 
                “Three reasons, Speaker. First, you were about to arrive and I wanted to meet you at least partway and bring you aboard at the earliest moment, as you had directed. Since my ship has a hyperrelay on board, I could not move too far away from Trevize and Pelorat without rousing suspicion on Terminus, but I judged I could risk moving this far. Second, when it was clear that Trevize was approaching Gaia Planet very slowly, I judged there would be time enough for me to move toward you and hasten our meeting without being overtaken by events, especially since you would be more competent than I to follow him to the planet itself and to handle any emergency that might arise.”
 
                “Quite true. And the third reason?”
 
                “Since our last communication, Speaker, something has happened that I did not expect and do not understand. I felt that--for that reason, too--I had better hasten our meeting as soon as I dared.”
 
                “And this event that you did not expect and do not understand?”
 
                “Ships of the Foundation fleet are approaching the Sayshellian frontier. My computer has picked up this information from Sayshellian news broadcasts. At least five advanced ships are in the flotilla and these have enough power to overwhelm Sayshell.”
 
                Gendibal did not answer at once, for it would not do to show that he had not expected such a move--or that he didn’t understand it. So, after a moment, he said negligently, “Do you suppose that this has something to do with Trevize’s movement toward Gaia?”
 
                “It certainly came immediately afterward--and if B follows A, then there is at least a possibility that A caused B,” said Compor.
 
                “Well then, it seems we all converge upon Gaia--Trevize, and I, and the First Foundation. --Come, you acted well, Compor,” said Gendibal, “and here is what we will now do. First, you will show me how this computer works and, through that, how the ship may be handled. I am sure that will not take long.
 
                “After that, you will get into my ship, since by then I will have impressed on your mind how to handle it. You will have no trouble maneuvering it, although I must tell you (as you have no doubt guessed from its appearance) that you will find it primitive indeed. Once you are in control of the ship, you will keep it here and wait for me.”
 
                “How long, Speaker?”
 
                “Until I come for you. I do not expect to be gone long enough for you to be in danger of running out of supplies, but if I am unduly delayed, you may find your way to some inhabited planet of the Sayshell union and wait there. Wherever you are, I will find you.”
 
                “As you say, Speaker.”
 
                “And do not be alarmed. I can handle this mysterious Gaia and, if need be, the five ships of the Foundation as well.”
 
  
 
 4.
 
  
 
 Littoral Thoobing had been the Foundation’s Ambassador to Sayshell for seven years. He rather liked the position.
 
                Tall and rather stout, he wore a thick brown mustache at a time when the predominant fashion, both in the Foundation and in Sayshell, was smooth-shaven. He had a strongly lined countenance, though he was only fifty-four--and was much given to a schooled indifference. His attitude toward his work was not easily seen.
 
                Still, he rather liked the position. It kept him away from the hurly-burly of polities on Terminus--something he appreciated-- and it gave him the chance to live the life of a Sayshellian sybarite and to support his wife and daughter in the style to which they had become addicted. He didn’t want his life disturbed.
 
                On the other hand, he rather disliked Liono Kodell, perhaps because Kodell also sported a mustache, though one which was smaller, shorter, and grayish-white. In the old days, they had been the only two people in prominent public life who had worn one and there had been rather a competition between them over the matter. Now (thought Thoobing) there was none; Kodell’s was contemptible.
 
                Kodell had been Director of Security when Thoobing was still on Terminus, dreaming of opposing Harla Branno in the race for Mayor, until he had been bought off with the ambassadorship. Branno had done it for her own sake, of course, but he had ended up owing her goodwill for that.
 
                But not to Kodell, somehow. Perhaps it was because of Kodell’s determined cheerfulness--the manner in which he was always such afriendly person--even after he had decided on just exactly the manner in which your throat was to be cut.
 
                Now he sat there in hyperspatial image, cheerful as ever, brimming over with bonhomie. His actual body was, of course, back on Terminus, which spared Thoobing the necessity of offering him any physical sign of hospitality.
 
                “Kodell,” he said. “I want those ships withdrawn.”
 
                Kodell smiled sunnily. “Why, so do I, but the old lady has made up her mind.”
 
                “You’ve been known to persuade her out of this or that.”
 
                “On occasion. Perhaps. When she wanted to be persuaded. This time she doesn’t want to be. --Thoobing, do your job. Keep Sayshell calm.”
 
                “I’m not thinking about Sayshell, Kodell. I’m thinking about the Foundation.”
 
                “So are we all.”
 
                “Kodell, don’t fence. I want you to listen to me.”
 
                “Gladly, but these are hectic times on Terminus and I will not listen to you forever.”
 
                “I will be as brief as I can be--when discussing the possibility of the Foundation’s destruction. If this hyperspatial line is not being tapped, I will speak openly.”
 
                “It is not being tapped.”
 
                “Then let me go on. I have received a message some days ago from one Golan Trevize. I recall a Trevize in my own political days, a Commissioner of Transportation.”
 
                “The young man’s uncle,” Kodell said.
 
                “Ah, then you know the Trevize who sent the message to me. According to the information I have since gathered, he was a Councilman who, after the recent successful resolution of a Seldon Crisis, was arrested and sent into exile.”
 
                “Exactly.”
 
                “I don’t believe it.”
 
                “What is it that you don’t believe?”
 
                “That he was sent into exile.”
 
                “Why not?”
 
                “When in history has any citizen of the Foundation been sent into exile?” demanded Thoobing. “He is arrested or not arrested. If he is arrested, he is tried or not tried. If he is tried, he is convicted or not convicted. If he is convicted, he is fined, demoted, disgraced, imprisoned, or executed. No one is sent into exile.”
 
                “There is always a first time.”
 
                “Nonsense. In an advanced naval vessel? What fool can fail to see that he is on a special mission for your old woman? Whom can she possibly expect to deceive?”
 
                “What would the mission be?”
 
                “Supposedly to find the planet Gaia.”
 
                Some of the cheerfulness left Kodell’s face. An unaccustomed hardness entered his eyes. He said, “I know that you feel no overwhelming impulse to believe my statements, Mr. Ambassador, but I make a special plea that you believe me in this one case. Neither the Mayor nor I had ever heard of Gaia at the time that Trevize was sent into exile. We have heard of Gaia, for the first time, just the other day. If you believe that, this conversation may continue.”
 
                “I will suspend my tendency toward skepticism long enough to accept that, Director, though it is difficult to do so.”
 
                “It is quite true, Mr. Ambassador, and if I have suddenly adopted a formal note to my statements it is because when this is done, you will find that you have questions to answer and that you will not find the occasion joyful. You speak as though Gaia is a world familiar to you. How is it that you know something we did not know? Is it not your duty to see to it that we know everything that you know about the political unit to which you are assigned?”
 
                Thoobing said softly, “Gaia is not part of the Sayshell union. It, in fact, probably does not exist. Am I to transmit to Terminus all the fairy tales that the superstitious lower orders of Sayshell tell of Gaia? Some of them say that Gaia is located in hyperspace. According to others, it is a world that supernaturally protects Sayshell. According to still others, it sent forth the Mule to prey on the Galaxy. If you are planning to tell the Sayshellian government that Trevize has been sent out to find Gaia and that five advanced ships of the Foundation Navy have been sent out to back him in this search, they will never believe you. The people may believe fairy tales about Gaia, but the government does not--and they will not be convinced that the Foundation does. They will feel that you intend to force Sayshell into the Foundation Federation.”
 
                “And what if we do plan that?”
 
                “It would be fatal. Come, Kodell, in the five-century history of the Foundation, when have we fought a war of conquest? We have fought wars to prevent our own conquest--and failed once--but no war has ended with an extension of our territory. Accessions to the Federation have been through peaceful agreements. We have been joined by those who saw benefits in joining.”
 
                “Isn’t it possible that Sayshell may see benefits in joining?”
 
                “They will never do so while our ships remain on their borders. Withdraw them.”
 
                “It can’t be done.”
 
                “Kodell, Sayshell is a marvelous advertisement for the benevolence of the Foundation Federation. It is nearly enclosed by our territory, it is in an utterly vulnerable position, and yet until now it has been safe, has gone its own way, has even been able to maintain an anti-Foundation foreign policy freely. How better can we show the Galaxy that we force no one, that we come in friendship to all? --If we take over Sayshell, we take that which, in essence, we already have. After all, we dominate it economically--if quietly. But if we take it over by military force, we advertise to all the Galaxy that we have become expansionist.”
 
                “And if I tell you that we are really interested only in Gaia?”
 
                “Then I will believe it no more than the Sayshell union will. This man, Trevize, sends me a message that he is on his way to Gaia and asks me to transmit it to Terminus. Against my better judgment, I do so because I must and, almost before the hyperspatial line is cool, the Foundation Navy is in motion. How will you get to Gaia, without penetrating Sayshellian space?”
 
                “Mydear Thoobing, surely you are not listening to yourself. Did you not tell me just a few minutes ago that Gaia, if it exists at all, is not part of the Sayshell union? And I presume you know that hyperspace is free to all and is part of no world’s territory. How then can Sayshell complain if we move from Foundation territory (where our ships stand right now), through hyperspace, into Gaian territory, and never in the process occupy a single cubic centimeter of Sayshellian territory?”
 
                “Sayshell will not interpret events like that, Kodell. Gaia, if it exists at all, is totally enclosed by the Sayshell union, even if it is not a political part of it, and there are precedents that make such enclaves virtual parts of the enclosing territory, as far as enemy warships are concerned.”
 
                “Ours are not enemy warships. We are at peace with Sayshell.”
 
                “I tell you that Sayshell may declare war. They won’t expect to win such a war through military superiority, but the fact is, war will set off a wave of anti-Foundation activity throughout the Galaxy. The new expansionist policies of the Foundation will encourage the growth of alliances against us. Some of the members of the Federation will begin to rethink their ties to us. We may well lose the war through internal disarray and we will then certainly reverse the process of growth that has served the Foundation so well for five hundred years.”
 
                “Come, come, Thoobing,” said Kodell indifferently, “You speak as though five hundred years is nothing, as though we are still the Foundation of Salvor Hardin’s time, fighting the pocket-kingdom of Anacreon. We are far stronger now than the Galactic Empire ever was at its very height. A squadron of our ships could defeat the entire Galactic Navy, occupy any Galactic sector, and never know it had been in a fight.”
 
                “We are not fighting the Galactic Empire. We fight planets and sectors of our own time.”
 
                “Who have not advanced as we have. We could gather in all the Galaxy now.”
 
                “According to the Seldon Plan, we can’t do that for another five hundred years.”
 
                “The Seldon Plan underestimates the speed of technological advance. We can do it now! --Understand me, I don’t say wewill do it now or evenshould do it now. I merely say wecan do it now.”
 
                “Kodell, you have lived all your life on Terminus. You don’t know the Galaxy. Our Navy and our technology can beat down the Armed Forces of other worlds, but we cannot yet govern an entire rebellions, hate-ridden Galaxy--and that is what it will be if we take it by force. Withdraw the ships!”
 
                “It can’t be done, Thoobing. Consider-- What if Gaia is not a myth?”
 
                Thoobing paused, scanning the other’s face as though anxious to read his mind. “A world in hyperspace not a myth?”
 
                “A world in hyperspace is superstition, but even superstitions may be built around kernels of truth. This man, Trevize, who was exiled, speaks of it as though it were a real world in real space. What if he is right?”
 
                “Nonsense. I don’t believe it.”
 
                “No? Believe it for just a moment. A real world that has lent Sayshell safety against the Mule and against the Foundation!”
 
                “But you refute yourself. How is Gaia keeping the Sayshellians safe from the Foundation? Are we not sending ships against it?”
 
                “Not against it, but against Gaia, which is so mysteriously unknown--which is so careful to avoid notice that while it is in real space it somehow convinces its neighbor worlds that it is in hyperspace--and which even manages to remain outside the computerized data of the best and most unabridged of Galactic maps.”
 
                “It must be a most unusual world, then, for it must be able to manipulate minds.”
 
                “And did you not say a moment ago that one Sayshellian tale is that Gaia sent forth the Mule to prey upon the Galaxy? And could not the Mule manipulate minds?”
 
                “And Gaia is a world of Mules, then?”
 
                “Are you sure it might not be?”
 
                “Why not a world of a reborn Second Foundation, in that case.”

                “Why not indeed? Should it not be investigated?”
 
                Thoobing grew sober. He had been smiling scornfully during the last exchanges, but now he lowered his head and stared up from under his eyebrows. “If you are serious, is such an investigation not dangerous?”
 
                “Is it?”
 
                “You answer my questions with other questions because you have no reasonable answers. Of what use will ships be against Mules or Second Foundationers? Is it not likely, in fact, that if they exist they are luring you into destruction? See here, you tell me that the Foundation can establish its Empire now, even though the Seldon Plan has reached only its midway point, and I have warned you that you would be racing too far ahead and that the intricacies of the Plan would slow you down by force. Perhaps, if Gaia exists and is what you say it is, all this is a device to bring about that slowdown. Do voluntarily now what you may soon be constrained to do. Do peacefully and without bloodshed now what you may be forced to do by woeful disaster. Withdraw the ships.”
 
                “It can’t be done. In fact, Thoobing, Mayor Branno herself plans to join the ships, and scoutships have already flitted through hyperspace to what is supposedly Gaian territory.”
 
                Thoobing’s eyes bulged. “There will surely be war, I tell you.”
 
                “You are our ambassador. Prevent that. Give the Sayshellians whatever assurances they need. Deny any ill will on our part. Tell them, if you have to, that it will pay them to sit quietly and wait for Gaia to destroy us. Say anything you want to, but keep them quiet.”
 
                He paused, searching Thoobing’s stunned expression, and said, “Really, that’s all. As far as I know, no Foundation ship will land on any world of the Sayshell union or penetrate any point in real space that is part of that union. However, any Sayshellian ship that attempts to challenge us outside union territory--and therefore inside Foundation territory--will promptly be reduced to dust. Make that perfectly clear, too, and keep the Sayshellians quiet. You will be held to strict account if you fail. You have had an easy job so far, Thoobing, but hard times are upon you and the next few weeks decide all. Fail us and no place in the Galaxy will be safe for you.”
 
                There was neither merriment nor friendliness in Kodell’s face as contact was broken and as his image disappeared.
 
                Thoobing stared open-mouthed at the place where he had been.
 
  
 
 5.
 
  
 
 Golan Trevize clutched at his hair as though he were trying, by feel, to judge the condition of his thinking. He said to Pelorat abruptly, “What is your state of mind?”
 
                “State of mind?” said Pelorat blankly.
 
                “Yes. Here we are, trapped--with our ship under outside control and being drawn inexorably to a world we know nothing about. Do you feel panic?”
 
                Pelorat’s long face registered a certain melancholia. “No,” he said.
 
                “I don’t feel joyful. I do feel a little apprehensive, but I’m not panicky.”
 
                “Neither am I. Isn’t that odd? Why aren’t we more upset than we are?”
 
                “This is something we expected, Golan.Something like this.”
 
                Trevize turned to the screen. It remained firmly focused on the space station. It was larger now, which meant they were closer.
 
                It seemed to him that it was not an impressive space station in design. There was nothing to it that bespoke superscience. In fact, it seemed a bit primitive. --Yet it had the ship in its grip.
 
                He said, “I’m being very analytical, Janov. Cool! --I like to think that I am not a coward and that I can behave well under pressure, but I tend to flatter myself. Everyone does. I should be jumping up and down right now and sweating a little. We may have expectedsomething , but that doesn’t change the fact that we are helpless and that we may be killed.”
 
                Pelorat said, “I don’t think so, Golan. If the Gaians could take over the ship at a distance, couldn’t they kill us at a distance? If we’re still alive--”
 
                “But we’re not altogether untouched. We’re too calm, I tell you. I think they’ve tranquilized us.”
 
                “Why?”
 
                “To keep us in good shape mentally, I think. It’s possible they wish to question us. After that, they may kill us.”
 
                “If they are rational enough to want to question us, they may be rational enough not to kill us for no good reason.”
 
                Trevize leaned back in his chair (it bent back at least--they hadn’t deprived the chair of its functioning) and placed his feet on the desk where ordinarily his hands made contact with the computer. He said, “They may be quite ingenious enough to work up what they consider a good reason. --Still, if they’ve touched our minds, It hasn’t been by much. If it were the Mule, for instance, he would have made useager to go--exalted, exultant, every fiber of ourselves crying out for arrival there.” He pointed to the space station. “Do you feel that way, Janov?”
 
                “Certainly not.”
 
                “You see that I’m still in a state where I can indulge in cool, analytical reasoning. Very odd! Or can I tell? Am I in a panic, incoherent, mad--and merely under the illusion that I am indulging in cool, analytical reasoning?”
 
                Pelorat shrugged. “You seem sane to me. Perhaps I am as insane as you and am under the same illusion, but that sort of argument gets us nowhere. All humanity could share a common insanity and be immersed in a common illusion while living in a common chaos. That can’t be disproved, but we have no choice but to follow our senses.” And then, abruptly, he said, “In fact, I’ve been doing some reasoning myself.”
 
                “Yes?”
 
                “Well, we talk about Gaia as a world of Mules, possibly, or as the Second Foundation reborn. Has it occurred to you that a third alternative exists, one that is more reasonable than either of the first two.”
 
                “What third alternative?”
 
                Pelorat’s eyes seemed concentrating inward. He did not look at Trevize and his voice was low and thoughtful. “We have a world-- Gaia--that has done its best, over an indefinite period of time, to maintain a strict isolation. It has in no way attempted to establish contact with any other world--not even the nearby worlds of the Sayshell union. It has an advanced science, in some ways, if the stories of their destruction of fleets is true and certainly their ability to control us right now bespeaks it--and yet they have made no attempt to expand their power. They ask only to be left alone.”
 
                Trevize narrowed his eyes. “So?”
 
                “It’s all very inhuman. The more than twenty thousand years of human history in space has been an uninterrupted tale of expansion and attempted expansion. Just about every known world that can be inhabitedis inhabited. Nearly every world has been quarreled over in the process and nearly every world has jostled each of its neighbors at one time or another. If Gaia is so inhuman as to be so different in this respect, it may be because it really is--inhuman.”
 
                Trevize shook his head. “Impossible.”
 
                “Why impossible?” said Pelorat warmly. “I’ve told you what a puzzle it is that the human race is the only evolved intelligence in the Galaxy. What if it isn’t? Might there not be one more--on one planet--that lacked the human expansionist drive? In fact,” Pelorat grew more excited, “what if there are a million intelligences in the Galaxy, but onlyone that is expansionist--ourselves? The others would all remain at home, unobtrusive, hidden--”
 
                “Ridiculous!” said Trevize. “We’d come across them. We’d land on their worlds. They would come in all types and stages of technology and most of them would be unable to stop us. But we’ve never come across any of them. Space! We’ve never even come across the ruins or relies of a nonhuman civilization, have we? You’re the historian, so you tell me. Have we?”
 
                Pelorat shook his head. “We haven’t. --But Golan, there could be one! This one!”
 
                “I don’t believe it. You say the name is Gaia, which is some ancient dialectical version of the name ‘Earth.’ How can that be nonhuman?”
 
                “The name ‘Gaia’ is given the planet by human beings--and who knows why? The resemblance to an ancient word might be coincidental. --Come to think of it, the very fact that we’ve been lured to Gaia--as you explained in great detail some time ago--and are now being drawn in against our will is an argument in favor of the nonhumanity of the Gaians.”
 
                “Why? What has that to do with nonhumanity?”
 
                “They’recurious about us--about humans.”
 
                Trevize said, “Janov, you’re mad. They’ve been living in a Galaxy surrounded by humans for thousands of years. Why should they be curious right now? Why not long before? And if right now, whyus ? If they want to study human beings and human culture, why not the Sayshell worlds? Why would they reach all the way to Terminus for us?”
 
                “They may be interested in the Foundation.”
 
                “Nonsense,” said Trevize violently. “Janov, youwant a nonhuman intelligence and youwill have one. Right now, I think that if you thought you were going to encounter nonhumans, you wouldn’t worry about having been captured, about being helpless, about being killed even--if they but gave you a little time to sate your curiosity.”
 
                Pelorat began to stutter an indignant negative, then stopped, drew a deep breath, and said, “Well, you may be right, Golan, but I’ll hold to my belief for a while just the same. I don’t think we’ll have to wait very long to see who’s right. --Look!”
 
                He pointed to the screen. Trevize--who had, in his excitement, ceased watching--now looked back. “What is it?” he said.
 
                “Isn’t that a ship taking off from the station?”
 
                “It’ssomething ,” admitted Trevize reluctantly. “I can’t make out the details yet and I can’t magnify the view any further. It’s at maximum magnification.” After awhile he said, “It seems to be approaching us and I suppose it’s a ship. Shall we make a bet?”
 
                “What sort of bet?”
 
                Trevize said sardonically, “If we ever get back to Terminus, let’s have a big dinner for ourselves and any guests we each care to invite, up to, say, four--and it will be on me if that ship approaching us carries nonhumans and on you if it carries humans.”
 
                “I’m willing,” said Pelorat.
 
                “Done, then,” and Trevize peered at the screen, trying to make out details and wondering if any details could reasonably be expected to give away, beyond question, the nonhumanity (or humanity) of the beings on board.
 
  
 
 6.
 
  
 
 Branno’s iron-gray hair lay immaculately in place and she might have been in the Mayoral Palace, considering her equanimity. She showed no sign that she was deep in space for only the second time in her life. (And the first time--when she accompanied her parents on a holiday tour to Kalgan--could scarcely count. She had been only three at the time.)
 
                She said to Kodell with a certain weary heaviness, “It is Thoobing’s job, after all, to express his opinion and to warn me. Very well, he has warned me. I don’t hold it against him.”
 
                Kodell, who had boarded the Mayor’s ship in order to speak to her without the psychological difficulty of imaging, said, “He’s been at his post too long. He’s beginning to think like a Sayshellian.”
 
                “That’s the occupational hazard of an ambassadorship, Liono. Let us wait till this is over and we’ll give him a long sabbatical and then send him on to another assignment elsewhere. He’s a capable man.--After all, he did have the wit to forward Trevize’s message without delay.”
 
                Kodell smiled briefly. “Yes, he told me he did it against his better judgment. ‘I do so because I must’ he said. You see, Madam Mayor, he had to, even against his better judgment, because as soon as Trevize entered the space of the Sayshell union, I informed Ambassador Thoobing to forward, at once, any and all information concerning him?’
 
                “Oh?” Mayor Branno turned in her seat to see his face more clearly. “And what made you do that?”
 
                “Elementary considerations, actually. Trevize was using a late-model Foundation naval vessel and the Sayshellians would be bound to noticethat . He’s an undiplomatic young jackass and they would be bound to noticethat . Therefore, he might get into trouble--and if there’s one thing a Foundationer knows, it is that if he gets into trouble anywhere in the Galaxy, he can cry out for the nearest Foundation representative. Personally I wouldn’t mind seeing Trevize in trouble--it might help him grow up and that would do him a great deal of good--but you’ve sent him out as your lightning rod and I wanted you to be able to estimate the nature of any lightning that might strike, so I made sure that the nearest Foundation representative would keep watch over him, that’s all.”
 
                “I see! Well, I understand now why Thoobing reacted so strenuously. I had sent him a similar warning. Since he heard from us both independently, one can scarcely blame him for thinking that the approach of a few Foundation vessels might mean a great deal more than it actually does. --How is it, Liono, you did not consult me on the matter before sending the warning?”
 
                Kodell said coolly, “If I involved you in everything I do, you would have no time to be Mayor. How is it that you did not inform me of your intention?”
 
                Branno said sourly, “If I informed you of all my intentions, Liono, you would know far too much. --But it is a small matter, and so is Thoobing’s alarm, and, for that matter, so is any fit that the Sayshellians throw. I am more interested in Trevize.”
 
                “Our scouts have located Compor. He is following Trevize and both are moving very cautiously toward Gaia.”
 
                “I have the full reports of those scouts, Liono. Apparently both Trevize and Compor are taking Gaia seriously.”
 
                “Everyone sneers at the superstitions concerning Gaia, Madam Mayor, but everyone thinks, ‘Yet what if--’ Even Ambassador Thoobing manages to be a little uneasy about it. It could be a very shrewd policy on the part of the Sayshellians. A kind of protective coloration. If one spreads stories of a mysterious and invincible world, people will shy away not only from the world, but from any other worlds close by--such as the Sayshell union.”
 
                “You think that is why the Mule turned away from Sayshell?”
 
                “Possibly.”
 
                “Surely you don’t think the Foundation has held its hand from Sayshell because of Gaia, when there is no record that we have ever heard of the world?”
 
                “I admit there’s no mention of Gaia in our archives, but neither is there any other reasonable explanation for our moderation with respect to the Sayshell union.”
 
                “Let us hope, then, that the Sayshellian government, despite Thoobing’s opinion to the contrary, has convinced itself--even just a little bit--of Gaia’s might and of its deadly nature.”
 
                “Why so?”
 
                “Because then the Sayshell union will raise no objections to our moving toward Gaia. The more they resent that movement, the more they will persuade themselves that it should be permitted so that Gaia will swallow us. The lesson, they will imagine, will be a salutary one and will not be lost on future invaders.”
 
                “Yet what if they should be right in such a belief, Mayor? What if Gaiais deadly?”
 
                Branno smiled. “You raise the ‘Yet what if--’ yourself, do you, Liono?”
 
                “I must raise all possibilities, Mayor. It is my job.”
 
                “If Gaia is deadly, Trevize will be taken by them. That ishis job as my lightning rod. And so may Compor, I hope.”
 
                “You hope? Why?”
 
                “Because it will make them overconfident, which should be useful to us. They will underestimate our power and be the easier to handle.”
 
                “But what if it iswe who are overconfident?”
 
                “We are not,” said Branno flatly.
 
                “These Gaians--whatever they are--may be something we have no concept of and cannot properly estimate the danger of. I merely suggest that, Mayor, because even that possibility should be weighed.”
 
                “Indeed? Why does such a notion fall into your head, Liono?”
 
                “Because I think you feel that, at the worst, Gaia is the Second Foundation. I suspect you think theyare the Second Foundation. However, Sayshell has an interesting history, even under the Empire. Sayshell alone had a measure of self-rule. Sayshell alone was spared some of the worst taxations under the so-called ‘Bad Emperors.’ In short, Sayshell seems to have had the protection of Gaia, even in Imperial times.”
 
                “Well then?”
 
                “But the Second Foundation was brought into existence by Hari Seldon at the same time our Foundation was. The Second Foundation did not exist in Imperial times--and Gaia did. Gaia, therefore, isnot the Second Foundation. It is something else--and, just possibly, something worse.”
 
                “I don’t propose to be terrified by the unknown, Liono. There are only two possible sources of danger--physical weapons and mental weapons--and we are fully prepared for both. --You get back to your ship and keep the units on the Sayshellian outskirts. This ship will move toward Gaia alone, but will stay in contact with you at all times and will expect you to come to us in one Jump, if necessary. --Go, Liono, and get that perturbed look off your face.”
 
                “One last question? Are you sure you know what you’re doing?”
 
                “I do,” she said grimly. “I, too, have studied the history of Sayshell and have seen that Gaia cannot be the Second Foundation, but, as I told you, I have the full report of the scouts and from that--”
 
                “Yes?”
 
                “Well, I know where the Second Foundation is located and we will take care of both, Liono. We will take care of Gaia first and then Trantor.”    

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 	GAIA
 1.
 
  
 
       IT TOOK HOURS FOR THE SKIP FROM THE SPACE STATION TO REACH THE vicinity of theFar Star --very long hours for Trevize to endure.
 
                Had the situation been normal, Trevize would have tried to signal and would have expected a response. If there had been no response, he would have taken evasive action.
 
                Since he was unarmed and there had been no response, there was nothing to do but wait. The computer would not respond to any direction he could give it that involved anything outside the ship.
 
                Internally, at least, everything worked well. The life-support systems were in perfect order, so that he and Pelorat were physically comfortable. Somehow, that didn’t help. Life dragged on and the uncertainty of what was to come was wearing him down. He noticed with irritation that Pelorat seemed calm. As though to make it worse, while Trevize felt no sense of hunger at all, Pelorat opened a small container of chicken-bits, which on opening had rapidly and automatically warmed itself. Now he was eating it methodically.
 
                Trevize said irritably, “Space, Janov! That stinks!”
 
                Pelorat looked startled and sniffed at the container. “It smells all right to me, Golan.”
 
                Trevize shook his head. “Don’t mind me. I’m just upset. But do use a fork. Your fingers will smell of chicken all day.”
 
                Pelorat looked at his fingers with surprise. “Sorry! I didn’t notice. I was thinking of something else.”
 
                Trevize said sarcastically, “Would you care to guess at what type of nonhumans the creatures on the approaching ship must be?” He was ashamed that he was less calm than Pelorat was. He was a Navy veteran (though he had never seen battle, of course) and Pelorat was a historian. Yet his companion sat there quietly.
 
                Pelorat said, “It would be impossible to imagine what direction evolution would take under conditions differing from those of Earth. The possibilities may not be infinite, but they would be so vast that they might as well be. However, I can predict that they are not senselessly violent and they will treat us in a civilized fashion. If that wasn’t true, we would be dead by now.”
 
                “At least you can still reason, Janov, my friend--you can still be tranquil. My nerves seem to be forcing their way through whatever tranquilization they have put us under. I have an extraordinary desire to stand up and pace. Why doesn’t that blasted ship arrive?”
 
                Pelorat said, “I am a man of passivity, Golan. I have spent my life doubled over records while waiting for other records to arrive. I do nothing but wait. You are a man of action and you are in deep pain when action is impossible.”
 
                Trevize felt some of his tension leave. He muttered, “I underestimate your good sense, Janov.”
 
                “No, you don’t,” said Pelorat placidly, “but even a na?ve academic can sometimes make sense out of life.”
 
                “And even the cleverest politician can sometimes fail to do so.”
 
                “I didn’t say that, Golan.” --
 
                “No, but I did. --So let me become active. I can still observe. The approaching ship is close enough to seem distinctly primitive.”
 
                “Seem?”
 
                Trevize said, “If it’s the product of nonhuman minds and hands, what may seem primitive may, in actual fact, be merely nonhuman.”
 
                “Do you think it might be a nonhuman artifact?” asked Pelorat, his face reddening slightly.
 
                “I can’t tell. I suspect that artifacts, however much they may vary from culture to culture, are never quite as plastic as products of genetic differences might be.”
 
                “That’s just a guess on your part. All we know are different cultures. We don’t know different intelligent species and therefore have no way of judging how different artifacts might be.”
 
                “Fish, dolphins, penguins, squids, even the ambiflexes, which are not of Earthly origin--assuming the others are--all solve the problem of motion through a viscous medium by streamlining, so that their appearances are not as different as their genetic makeup might lead one to believe. It might be so with artifacts.”
 
                “The squid’s tentacles and the ambiflex’s helical vibrators,” responded Pelorat, “are enormously different from each other, and from the fins, flippers, and limbs of vertebrates. It might be so with artifacts.”
 
                “In any case,” said Trevize, “I feel better. Talking nonsense with you, Janov, quiets my nerves. And I suspect we’ll know what we’re getting into soon, too. The ship is not going to be able to dock with ours and whatever is on it will come across on an old-fashioned tether--or we will somehow be urged to cross to it on one--since the unilock will be useless. --Unless some nonhuman will use some other system altogether.”
 
                “How big is the ship?”
 
                “Without being able to use the ship’s computer to calculate the distance of the ship by radar, we can’t possibly know the size.”
 
                A tether snaked out toward theFar Star .
 
                Trevize said, “Either there’s a human aboard or nonhumans use the same device. Perhaps nothing but a tether can possibly work.”
 
                “They might use a tube,” said Pelorat, “or a horizontal ladder.”
 
                “Those are inflexible things. It would be far too complicated to try to make contact with those. You need something that combines strength and flexibility.”
 
                The tether made a dull clang on theFar Star as the solid hull (and consequently the air within) was set to vibrating. There was the usual slithering as the other ship made the fine adjustments of speed required to bring the two into a common velocity. The tether was motionless relative to both.
 
                A black dot appeared on the hull of the other ship and expanded like the pupil of an eye.
 
                Trevize grunted. “An expanding diaphragm, instead of a sliding panel.”
 
                “Nonhuman?”
 
                “Not necessarily, I suppose. But interesting.”
 
                A figure emerged.
 
                Pelorat’s lips tightened for a moment and then he said in a disappointed voice, “Too bad. Human.”
 
                “Not necessarily,” said Trevize calmly. “All we can make out is that there seem to be five projections. That could be a head, two arms, and two legs--but it might not be. --Wait!”
 
                “What?”
 
                “It moves more rapidly and smoothly than I expected. --Ah!”
 
                “What?”
 
                “There’s some sort of propulsion. It’s not rocketry, as nearly as I can tell, but neither is it hand over hand. Still, not necessarily human.”
 
                There seemed an incredibly long wait despite the quick approach of the figure along the tether, but there was finally the noise of contact.
 
                Trevize said, “It’s coming in, whatever it is. My impulse is to tackle it the minute it appears.” He balled a fist.
 
                “I think we had better relax,” said Pelorat. “It may be stronger than we. It can control our minds. There are surely others on the ship. We had better wait till we know more about what we are facing.”
 
                “You grow more and more sensible by the minute, Janov,” said Trevize, “and I, less and less.”
 
                They could hear the airlock moving into action and finally the figure appeared inside the ship.
 
                “About normal size,” muttered Pelorat. “The space suit could fit a human being.”
 
                “I never saw or heard of such a design, but it doesn’t fall outside the limits of human manufacture, it seems to me. --It doesn’t say anything.”
 
                The space-suited figure stood before them and a forelimb rose to the rounded helmet, which--if it were made of glass--possessed one-way transparency only. Nothing could be seen inside.
 
                The limb touched something with a quick motion that Trevize did not clearly make out and the helmet was at once detached from the rest of the suit. It lifted off.
 
                What was exposed was the face of a young and undeniably pretty woman.
 
  
 
 2.
 
  
 
 Pelorat’s expressionless face did what it could to look stupefied. He said hesitantly, “Are you human?”
 
                The woman’s eyebrows shot up and her lips pouted. There was no way of telling from the action whether she was faced with a strange language and did not understand or whether she understood and wondered at the question.
 
                Her hand moved quickly to the left side of her suit, which opened in one piece as though it were on a set of hinges. She stepped out and the suit remained standing without content for a moment. Then, with a soft sigh that seemed almost human, it collapsed.
 
                She looked even younger, now that she had stepped out. Her clothing was loose and translucent, with the skimpy items beneath visible as shadows. The outer robe reached to her knees.
 
                She was small-breasted and narrow-waisted, with hips rounded and full. Her thighs, which were seen in shadow, were generous, but her legs narrowed to graceful ankles. Her hair was dark and shoulder-length, her eyes brown and large, her lips full and slightly asymmetric.
 
                She looked down at herself and then solved the problem of her understanding of the language by saying, “Don’t Ilook human?”
 
                She spoke Galactic Standard with just a trifle of hesitation, as though she were straining a bit to get the pronunciation quite right.
 
                Pelorat nodded and said with a small smile, “I can’t deny it. Quite human. Delightfully human.”
 
                The young woman spread her arms as though inviting closer examination. “I should hope so, gentleman. Men have died for this body.”
 
                “I would rather live for it,” said Pelorat, finding a vein of gallantry which faintly surprised him.
 
                “Good choice,” said the woman solemnly. “Once this body is attained, all sighs become sighs of ecstasy.”
 
                She laughed and Pelorat laughed with her.
 
                Trevize, whose forehead had puckered into a frown through this exchange, rapped out, “How old are you?”
 
                The woman seemed to shrink a little. “Twenty-three-- gentleman.”
 
                “Why have you come? What is your purpose here?”
 
                “I have come to escort you to Gaia.” Her command of Galactic Standard was slipping slightly and her vowels tended to round into diphthongs. She made “come” sound like “comb” and “Gaia” like “Gay-uh.”
 
                “Agirl to escort us.”
 
                The woman drew herself up and suddenly she had the bearing of one in charge. “I,” she said, “am Gaia, as well as another. It was my stint on the station.”
 
                “Yourstint? Were you the only one on board?”
 
                Proudly. “I was all that was needed.”
 
                “And is it empty now?”
 
                “I am no longer on it, gentleman, but it is not empty.It is there.”
 
                “It? To what do you refer?”
 
                “To the station. It is Gaia. It doesn’t need me. It holds your ship.”
 
                “Then what are you doing on the station?”
 
                “It is my stint.”
 
                Pelorat had taken Trevize by the sleeve and had been shaken off. He tried again. “Golan,” he said in an urgent half-whisper. “Don’t shout at her. She’s only a girl. Let me deal with this.”
 
                Trevize shook his head angrily, but Pelorat said, “Young woman, what is your name?”
 
                The woman smiled with sudden sunniness, as though responding to the softer tone. She said, “Bliss.”
 
                “Bliss?” said Pelorat. “A very nice name. Surely that’s not all there is.”
 
                “Of course not. A fine thing it would be to have one syllable. It would be duplicated on every section and we wouldn’t tell one from another, so that the men would be dying for the wrong body. Bussenobiarella is my name in full.”
 
                “Nowthat’s a mouthful.”--
 
                “What? Seven syllables? That’s not much. I have friends with fifteen syllables in their names and they never get done trying combinations for the friend-name. I’ve stuck with Bliss now ever since I turned fifteen. My mother called me ‘Nobby,’ if you can imagine such a thing.”
 
                “In Galactic Standard, ‘bliss’ means ‘ecstasy’ or ‘extreme happiness,’” said Pelorat.
 
                “In Gaian language, too. It’s notvery different from Standard, and ‘ecstasy’ is the impression I intend to convey.”
 
                “My name is Janov Pelorat.”
 
                “I know that. And this other gentleman--the shouter--is Golan Trevize. We received word from Sayshell.”
 
                Trevize said at once, his eyes narrow, “How did you receive word?”
 
                Bliss turned to look at him and said calmly, “I didn’t. Gaia did.”
 
                Pelorat said, “Miss Bliss, may my partner and myself speak Privately for a moment?”
 
                “Yes, certainly, but we have to get on with it, you know.”
 
                “I won’t take long.” He pulled hard at Trevize’s elbow and was reluctantly followed into the other room.
 
                Trevize said in a whisper, “What’s all this? I’m sure she can hear us in here. She can probably read our minds, blast the creature.”
 
                “Whether she can or can’t, we need a bit of psychological isolation for just a moment. Look, old chap, leave her alone. There’s nothing we can do, and there’s no use taking that out on her. There’s probably nothing she can do either. She’s just a messenger girl. Actually, as long as she’s on board, we’re probably safe; they wouldn’t have put her on board if they intended to destroy the ship. Keep bullying and perhaps they will destroy it--and us--after they take her off.”
 
                “I don’t like being helpless,” said Trevize grumpily.
 
                “Who does? But acting like a bully doesn’t make you less helpless. It just makes you a helpless bully. Oh, my dear chap, I don’t mean to be bullyingyou like this and you must forgive me if I’m excessively critical of you, but the girl is not to be blamed.”
 
                “Janov, she’s young enough to be your youngest daughter.”
 
                Pelorat straightened. “All the more reason to treat her gently. Nor do I know what you imply by the statement.”
 
                Trevize thought a moment, then his face cleared. “Very well. You’re right. I’m wrong. It is irritating, though, to have them send a girl. They might have sent a military officer, for instance, and given us a sense of somevalue , so to speak. Just a girl? And she keeps placing responsibility on Gaia?”
 
                “She’s probably referring to a ruler who takes the name of the planet as an honorific--or else she’s referring to the planetary council. We’ll find out, but probably not by direct questioning.”
 
                “Men have died for her body!” said Trevize. “Huh! --She’s bottom-heavy!”
 
                “No one is asking you to die for it, Golan,” said Pelorat gently. “Come! Allow her a sense of self-mockery. I consider it amusing and good-natured, myself.”
 
                They found Bliss at the computer, bending down and staring at its component parts with her hands behind her back as though she feared touching it.
 
                She looked up as they entered, ducking their heads under the low lintel. “This is an amazing ship,” she said. “I don’t understand half of what I see, but if you’re going to give me a greeting-present, this is it. It’s beautiful. It makes my ship look awful.”
 
                Her face took on a look of ardent curiosity. “Are you really from the Foundation?”
 
                “How do you know about the Foundation?” asked Pelorat.
 
                “We learn about it in school. Mostly because of the Mule.”
 
                “Why because of the Mule, Bliss?”
 
                “He’s one of us, gentle-- What syllable of your name may I use, gentleman?”
 
                Pelorat said, “Either Jan or Pel. Which do you prefer?”
 
                “He’s one of us, Pel,” said Bliss with a comradely smile. “He was born on Gaia, but no one seems to know where exactly.”
 
                Trevize said, “I imagine he’s a Gaian hero, Bliss, eh?” He had become determinedly, almost aggressively, friendly and cast a placating glance in Pelorat’s direction. “Call me Trev,” he added.
 
                “Oh no,” she said at once. “He’s a criminal. He left Gaia without permission, and no one should do that. No one knowshow he did it. But he left, and I guess that’s why he came to a bad end. The Foundation beat him in the end.”
 
                “TheSecond Foundation?” said Trevize.
 
                “Is there more than one? I suppose if I thought about it I would know, but I’m not interested in history, really. The way I look at it is, I’m interested in what Gaia thinks best. If history just goes past me, it’s because there are enough historians or that I’m not well adapted to it. I’m probably being trained as a space technician myself. I keep being assigned to stints like this and I seem to like it and it stands to reason I wouldn’t like it if--”
 
                She was speaking rapidly, almost breathlessly, and Trevize had to make an effort to insert a sentence. “Who’s Gaia?”
 
                Bliss looked puzzled at that. “Just Gaia. --Please, Pel and Trev, let’s get on with it. We’ve got to get to the surface.”
 
                “We’re going there, aren’t we?”
 
                “Yes, but slowly. Gaia feels you can move much more rapidly if you use the potential of your ship. Would you do that?”
 
                “We could,” said Trevize grimly. “But if I get the control of the ship back, wouldn’t I be more likely to zoom off in the opposite direction?”
 
                Bliss laughed. “You’re funny. Of course, you can’t go in any direction Gaia doesn’t want you to go. But you can go faster in the direction Gaiadoes want you to go. See?”
 
                “We see,” said Trevize, “and I’ll try to control my sense of humor.Where do I land on the surface?”
 
                “It doesn’t matter. You just head downward and you’ll land at the right place. Gain will see to that.”
 
                Pelorat said, “And will you stay with us, Bliss, and see that we are treated well?”
 
                “I suppose I can do that. Let’s see now, the usual fee for my services--I meanthat kind of services--can be entered on my balance-card.”
 
                “And the other kind of services?”
 
                Bliss giggled. “You’re a nice old man.”
 
                Pelorat winced.
 
  
 
 3.
 
  
 
 Bliss reacted to the swoop down to Gaia with a na?ve excitement. She said, “There’s no feeling of acceleration.”
 
                “It’s a gravitic drive,” said Pelorat. “Everything accelerates together, ourselves included, so we don’t feel anything.”
 
                “But how does it work, Pel?”
 
                Pelorat shrugged. “I think Trev knows,” he said, “but I don’t think he’s really in a mood to talk about it.”
 
                Trevize had dropped down Gaia’s gravity-well almost recklessly. The ship responded to his direction, as Bliss had warned him, in a partial manner. An attempt to cross the lines of gravitic force obliquely was accepted--but only with a certain hesitation. An attempt to rise upward was utterly ignored.
 
                The ship was still not his.
 
                Pelorat said mildly, “Aren’t you going downward rather rapidly, Golan?”
 
                Trevize, with a kind of flatness to his voice, attempting to avoid anger (more for Pelorat’s sake, than anything else) said, “The young lady says that Gaia will take care of us.”
 
                Bliss said, “Surely, Pel. Gaia wouldn’t let this ship do anything that wasn’t safe. Is there anything to eat on board?”
 
                “Yes indeed,” said Pelorat. “What would you like?”
 
                “No meat, Pel,” said Bliss in a businesslike way, “but I’ll take fish or eggs, along with any vegetables you might have.”
 
                “Some of the food we have is Sayshellian, Bliss,” said Pelorat. “I’m not sure I know what’s in it, but you might like it.”
 
                “Well, I’ll taste some,” said Bliss dubiously.
 
                “Are the people on Gaia vegetarian?” asked Pelorat.
 
                “A lot are.” Bliss nodded her head vigorously. “It depends on what nutrients the body needs in particular cases. Lately I haven’t been hungry for meat, so I suppose I don’t need any. And I haven’t been aching for anything sweet. Cheese tastes good, and shrimp. I think I probably need to lose weight.” She slapped her right buttock with a resounding noise. “I need to lose five or six pounds right here.”
 
                “I don’t see why,” said Pelorat. “It gives you something comfortable to sit on.”
 
                Bliss twisted to look down at her rear as best she might. “Oh well, it doesn’t matter. Weight goes up or down as it ought. I shouldn’t concern myself.”
 
                Trevize was silent because he was struggling with theFar Star . He had hesitated a bit too long for orbit and the lower limits of the planetary exosphere were now screaming past the ship. Little by little, the ship was escaping from his control altogether. It was as though something else had learned to handle the gravitic engines. TheFar Star , acting apparently by itself, curved upward into thinner air and slowed rapidly. It then took up a path on its own that brought it into a gentle downward curve.
 
                Bliss had ignored the edgy sound of air resistance and sniffed delicately at the steam rising from the container. She said, “It must be all right, Pd, because if it weren’t, it wouldn’t smell right and I wouldn’t want to eat it.” She put a slim finger into it and then licked at the finger. “You guessed correctly, Pd. It’s shrimp or something like it. Good!”
 
                With a gesture of dissatisfaction, Trevize abandoned the computer.
 
                “Young woman,” he said, as though seeing her for the first time.
 
                “My name is Bliss,” said Bliss firmly.
 
                “Bliss, then! You knew our names.”
 
                “Yes, Trev.”
 
                “How did you know them?”
 
                “It was important that I know them, in order for me to do my job. So I knew them.”
 
                “Do you know who Munn Li Compor is?”
 
                “I would--if it were important for me to know who he is. Since I do not know who he is, Mr. Compor is not coming here. For that matter,” she paused a moment, “no one is coming here but you two.”
 
                “We’ll see.”
 
                He was looking down. It was a cloudy planet. There wasn’t a solid layer of cloud, but it was a broken layer that was remarkably evenly scattered and offered no clear view of any part of the planetary surface.
 
                He switched to microwave and the radarscope glittered. The surface was almost an image of the sky. It seemed a world of islands-- rather like Terminus, but more so. None of the islands was very large and none was very isolated. It was something of an approach to a planetary archipelago. The ship’s orbit was well inclined to the equatorial plane, but he saw no sign of ice caps.
 
                Neither were there the unmistakable marks of uneven population distribution, as would be expected, for instance, in the illumination of the night side.
 
                “Will I be coming down near the capital city, Bliss?” asked Trevize.
 
                Bliss said indifferently, “Gaia will put you down somewhere convenient.”
 
                “I’d prefer a big city.”
 
                “Do you mean a large people-grouping?”
 
                “Yes.”
 
                “It’s up to Gaia.”
 
                The ship continued its downward path and Trevize tried to find amusement in guessing on which island it would land.
 
                Whichever it might be, it appeared they would be landing within the hour.
 
  
 
 4.
 
  
 
       The ship landed in a quiet, almost feathery manner, without a moment of jarring, without one anomalous gravitational effect. They stepped out, one by one: first Bliss, then Pelorat, and finally Trevize.
 
                The weather was comparable to early summer at Terminus City. There was a mild breeze and with what seemed to be a late-morning sun shining brightly down from a mottled sky. The ground was green underfoot and in one direction there were the serried rows of trees that bespoke an orchard, while in the other there was the distant line of seashore.
 
                There was the low hum of what might have been insect life, a flash of bird--orsome small flying creature--above and to one side, and theclack-clack of what might have been some farm instrument.
 
                Pelorat was the first to speak and he mentioned nothing he either saw or heard. Instead, he drew in his breath raspingly and said, “Ah, it smellsgood , like fresh-made applesauce.”
 
                Trevize said, “That’s probably an apple orchard we’re looking at and, for all we know, they’re making applesauce.”
 
                “On your ship, on the other hand,” said Bliss, “it smelled like-- Well, it smelled terrible.”
 
                “You didn’t complain when you were on it,” growled Trevize.
 
                “I had to be polite. I was a guest on your ship.”
 
                “What’s wrong with staying polite?”
 
                “I’m on my own world now.You’re the guest.You be polite.”
 
                Pelorat said, “She’s probably right about the smell, Golan. Is there any way of airing out the ship?”
 
                “Yes,” said Trevize with a snap. “It can be done--if this little creature can assure us that the ship will not be disturbed. She has already shown us she can exert unusual power over the ship.”
 
                Bliss drew herself up to her full height. “I’m not exactly little and if leaving your ship alone is what it takes to get it cleaned up, I assure you leaving it alone will be a pleasure.”
 
                “And then can we be taken to whoever it is that you speak of as Gaia?” said Trevize.
 
                Bliss looked amused. “I don’t know if you’re going to believe this, Trev.I’m Gaia.”
 
                Trevize stared. He had often heard the phrase “collect one’s thoughts” used metaphorically. For the first time in his life, he felt as though he were engaged in the process literally. Finally he said, “You?”
 
                “Yes. And the ground. And those trees. And that rabbit over there in the grass. And the man you can see through the trees. The whole planet and everything on it is Gaia. We’re all individuals--we’re all separate organisms--but we all share an overall consciousness. The inanimate planet does so least of all, the various forms of life to a varying degree, and human beings most of all--but we all share.”
 
                Pelorat said, “I think, Trevize, that she means Gaia is some sort of group consciousness.”
 
                Trevize nodded. “I gathered that. --In that case, Bliss, who runs this world?”
 
                Bliss said, “It runs itself. Those trees grow in rank and file of their own accord. They multiply only to the extent that is needed to replace those that for any reason die. Human beings harvest the apples that are needed; other animals, including insects, eat their share-- and only their share.”
 
                “The insects know what their share is, do they?” said Trevize.
 
                “Yes, they do--in a way. It rains when it is necessary and occasionally it rains rather hard whenthat is necessary--and occasionally there’s a siege of dry weather whenthat is necessary.”
 
                “And the rain knows what to do, does it?”
 
                “Yes, it does,” said Bliss very seriously. “In your own body, don’t all the different cells know what to do? When to grow and when to stop growing? When to form certain substances and when not to-- and when they form them, just how much to form, neither more nor less? Each cell is, to a certain extent, an independent chemical factory, but all draw from a common fund of raw materials brought to it by a common transportation system, all deliver wastes into common channels, and all contribute to an overall group consciousness.”
 
                Pelorat said with a certain enthusiasm, “But that’s remarkable. You are saying that the planet is a superorganism and that you are a cell of that superorganism.”
 
                “I’m making an analogy, not an identity. We are the analog of cells, but we are not identical with cells--do you understand?”
 
                “In what way,” said Trevize, “are you not cells?”
 
                “We are ourselves made up of cells and have a group consciousness, as far as cells are concerned. This group consciousness, this consciousness of an individual organism--a human being, in my case--”
 
                “With a body men die for.”
 
                “Exactly. My consciousness is far advanced beyond that of any individual cell--incredibly far advanced. The fact that we, in turn, are part of a still greater group consciousness on a higher level does not reduce us to the level of cells. I remain a human being--but above us is a group consciousness as far beyond my grasp as my consciousness is beyond that of one of the muscle cells of my biceps.”
 
                Trevize said, “Surely someone ordered our ship to be taken.”
 
                “No, not someone! Gaia ordered it. All of us ordered it.”
 
                “The trees and the ground, too, Bliss?”
 
                “They contributed very little, but they contributed. Look, if a musician writes a symphony, do you ask which particular cell in his body ordered the symphony written and supervised its construction?”
 
                Pelorat said, “And, I .take it, the group mind, so to speak, of the group consciousness is much stronger than an individual mind, just as a muscle is much stronger than an individual muscle cell. Consequently Gaia can capture our ship at a distance by controlling our computer, even though no individual mind on the planet could have done so.”
 
                “You understand perfectly, Pel,” said Bliss.
 
                “And I understand it, too,” said Trevize. “It is not that hard to understand. But what do you want of us? We have not come to attack you. We have come seeking information. Why have you seized us?”
 
                “To talk to you.”
 
                “You might have talked to us on the ship.”
 
                Bliss shook her head gravely, “I am not the one to do it.”
 
                “Aren’t you part of the group mind?”
 
                “Yes, but I cannot fly like a bird, buzz like an insect, or grow as tall as a tree. I do what it is best for me to do and it is not best that I give you the information--though the knowledge could easily be assigned to me.”
 
                “Who decidednot to assign it to you?”
 
                “We all did.”
 
                “Who will give us the information?”
 
                “And who is Dom?”
 
                “Well,” said Bliss. “His full name is Endomandiovizamarondeyaso--and so on. Different people call him different syllables at different times, but I know him as Dom and I think you two will use that syllable as well. He probably has a larger share of Gaia than anyone on the planet and he lives on this island. He asked to see you and it was allowed.”
 
                “Who allowed it?” asked Trevize--and answered himself at once, “Yes, I know; you all did.”
 
                Bliss nodded.
 
                Pelorat said, “When will we be seeing Dom, Bliss?”
 
                “Right away. If you follow me, I’ll take you to him now, Pel. And you, too, of course, Trev.”
 
                “And will you leave, then?” asked Pelorat.
 
                “You don’t want me to, Pel?”
 
                “Actually, no.”
 
                “There you are,” said Bliss as they followed her along a smoothly paved road that skirted the orchard. “Men grow addicted to me on short order. Even dignified elderly men are overcome with boyish ardor.”
 
                Pelorat laughed. “I wouldn’t count on much boyish ardor, Bliss, but if I had it I could do worse than have it on your account, I think.”
 
                Bliss said, “Oh, don’t discount your boyish ardor. I work wonders.”
 
                Trevize said impatiently, “Once we get to where we’re going, how long will we have to wait for this Dom?”
 
                “Hewill be waiting foryou . After all, Dom-through-Gaia has worked for years to bring you here.”
 
                Trevize stopped in midstep and looked quickly at Pelorat, who quietly mouthed: You were right.
 
                Bliss, who was looking straight ahead, said calmly, “I know, Trev, that you have suspected that I/we/Gaia was interested in you.”
 
                “‘I/we/Gaia’?” said Pelorat softly.
 
                She turned to smile at him. “We have a whole complex of different pronouns to express the shades of individuality that exist on Gaia. I could explain them to you, but till then ‘I/we/Gaia’ gets across what I mean in a groping sort of way. --Please move on, Trev. Dom is waiting and I don’t wish to force your legs to move against your will. It is an uncomfortable feeling if you’re not used to it.”
 
                Trevize moved on. His glance at Bliss was compounded of the deepest suspicion.
 
  
 
 5.
 
  
 
 Dom was an elderly man. He recited the two hundred and fifty-three syllables of his name in a musical flowing of tone and emphasis.
 
                “In a way,” he said, “it is a brief biography of myself. It tells the hearer--or reader, or senser--who I am, what part I have played in the whole, what I have accomplished. For fifty years and more, however, I have been satisfied to be referred to as Dom. When there are other Doms at issue, I can be called Domandio--and in my various professional relationships other variants are used. Once a Gaian year --on my birthday--my full name is recited-in-mind, as I have just recited it for you in voice. It is very effective, but it is personally embarrassing.”
 
                He was tall and thin--almost to the point of emaciation. His deep-set eyes sparkled with anomalous youth, though he moved rather slowly. His jutting nose was thin and long and flared at the nostrils. His hands, prominently veined though they were, showed no signs of arthritic disability. He wore a long robe that was as gray as his hair. It descended to his ankles and his sandals left his toes bare.
 
                Trevize said, “How old are you, sir?”
 
                “Please address me as Dom, Trev. To use other modes of address induces formality and inhibits the free exchange of ideas between you and me. In Galactic Standard Years, I am just past ninety-three, but the real celebration will come not very many months from now, when I reach the ninetieth anniversary of my birth in Gaian years.”
 
                “I would not have guessed you at more than seventy-five, s--Dom,” said Trevize.
 
                “By Gaian standards I am not remarkable, either in years or in appearance of years, Trev. --But come, have we eaten?”
 
                Pelorat looked down at his plate, on which perceptible remnants of a most unremarkable and indifferently prepared meal remained, and said in a diffident manner, “Dom, may I attempt to ask an embarrassing question? Of course, if it’s offensive, you will please say so, and I will withdraw it.”
 
                “Go ahead,” said Dom, smiling. “I am anxious to explain to you anything about Gaia which arouses your curiosity.”
 
                “Why?” said Trevize at once.
 
                “Because you are honored guests-- May I have Pel’s question?”
 
                Pelorat said, “Since all things on Gaia share in the group consciousness, how is it that you--one element of the group--can eat this, which was clearly another element?”
 
                “True! But all things recycle. We must eat and everything we can eat, plant as well as animal--even the inanimate seasonings--are part of Gaia. But, then, you see, nothing is killed for pleasure or sport, nothing is killed with unnecessary pain. And I’m afraid we make no attempt to glorify our meal preparations, for no Gaian would eat except that one must. You did not enjoy this meal, Pel? Trev? Well, meals are not to enjoy.
 
                “Then, too, what is eaten remains, after all, part of the planetary consciousness. Insofar as portions of it are incorporated into my body, it will participate in a larger share of the total consciousness. When I die, I, too, will be eaten--even if only by decay bacteria-- and I will then participate in a far smaller share of the total. But someday, parts of me will be parts of other human beings, parts of many.”
 
                Pelorat said, “A sort of transmigration of souls.”
 
                “Of what, Pel?”
 
                “I speak of an old myth that is current on some worlds.”
 
                “Ah, I don’t know of it. You must tell me on some occasion.”
 
                Trevize said, “But your individual consciousness--whatever it is about you that is Dom--will never fully reassemble.”
 
                “No, of course not. But does that matter? I will still be part of Gaia and that is what counts. There are mystics among us who wonder if we should take measures to develop group memories of past existences, but the sense-of-Gaia is that this cannot be done in any practical way and would serve no useful purpose. It would merely blur present consciousness. --Of course, as conditions change, the sense-of-Gaia may change, too, but I find no chance of that in the foreseeable future.”
 
                “Why must you die, Dom?” asked Trevize. “Look at you in your nineties. Could not the group consciousness--”
 
                For the first time, Dom frowned. “Never,” he said. “I can contribute only so much. Each new individual is a reshuffling of molecules and genes into something new. New talents, new abilities, new contributions to Gaia. We must have them--and the only way we can is to make room. I have done more than most, but even I have my limit and it is approaching. There is no more desire to live past one’s time than to die before it.”
 
                And then, as if realizing he had lent a suddenly somber note to the evening, he rose and stretched his arms out to the two. “Come, Trev--Pel--let us move into my studio where I can show you some of my personal art objects. You won’t blame an old man for his little vanities, I hope.”
 
                He led the way into another room where, on a small circular table, there were a group of smoky lenses connected in pairs.
 
                “These,” said Dom, “are Participations I have designed. I am not one of the masters, but I specialize in inanimates, which few of the masters bother with.”
 
                Pelorat said, “May I pick one up? Are they fragile?”
 
                “No no. Bounce them on the floor if you like. --Or perhaps you had better not. Concussion could dull the sharpness of the vision.”
 
                “How are they used, Dom?”
 
                “You put them over your eyes. They’ll cling. They do not transmit light. Quite the contrary. They obscure light that might otherwise distract you--though the sensations do reach your brain by way of the optic nerve. Essentially your consciousness is sharpened and is allowed to participate in other facets of Gaia. In other words, if you look at that wall, you will experience that wall as it appears to itself.”
 
                “Fascinating,” muttered Pelorat. “may I try that?”
 
                “Certainly, Pel. You may take one at random. Each is a different construct that shows the wall--or any other inanimate object you look at--in a different aspect of the object’s consciousness.”
 
                Pelorat placed one pair over his eyes and they clung there at once. He started at the touch and then remained motionless for a long time.
 
                Dom said, “When you are through, place your hands on either side of the Participation and press them toward each other. It will come right off.”
 
                Pelorat did so, blinked his eyes rapidly, then rubbed them.
 
                Dom said, “What did you experience?”
 
                Pelorat said, “It’s hard to describe. The wall seemed to twinkle and glisten and, at times, it seemed to turn fluid. It seemed to have ribs and changing symmetries. I--I’m sorry, Dom, but I did not find it attractive.”
 
                Dom sighed. “You do not participate in Gaia, so you would not see what we see. I had rather feared that. Too bad! I assure you that although these Participations are enjoyed primarily for their aesthetic value, they have their practical uses, too. A happy wall is a long-lived wall, a practical wall, a useful wall.”
 
                “Ahappy wall?” said Trevize, smiling slightly.
 
                Dom said, “There is a dim sensation that a wall experiences that is analogous to what ‘happy’ means to us. A wall is happy when it is well designed, when it rests firmly on its foundation, when its symmetry balances its parts and produces no unpleasant stresses. Good design can be worked out on the mathematical principles of mechanics, but the use of a proper Participation can fine tune it down to virtually atomic dimensions. No sculptor can possibly produce a first-class work of art here on Gaia without a well-crafted Participation and the ones I produce of this particular type are considered excellent--if I do say so myself.
 
                “Animate Participations, which are not my field,” and Dom was going on with the kind of excitement one expects in someone riding his hobby, “give us, by analogy, a direct experience of ecological balance. The ecological balance on Gaia is rather simple, as it is on all worlds, but here, at least, we have the hope of making it more complex and thus enriching the total consciousness enormously.”
 
                Trevize held up his hand in order to forestall Pelorat and wave him into silence. He said, “How do you know that a planet can bear a more complex ecological balance if they all have simple ones?”
 
                “Ah,” said Dom, his eyes twinkling shrewdly, “you are testing the old man. You know as well as I do that the original home of humanity, Earth, had an enormously complex ecological balance. It is only the secondary worlds--the derived worlds--that are simple.”
 
                Pelorat would not be kept silent. “But that is the problem I have set myself in life. Why was it only Earth that bore a complex ecology? What distinguished it from other worlds? Why did millions upon millions of other worlds in the Galaxy--worlds that were capable of bearing life--develop only an undistinguished vegetation, together with small and unintelligent animal life-forms?”
 
                Dom said, “We have a tale about that--a fable, perhaps. I cannot vouch for its authenticity. In fact, on the face of it, it sounds like fiction.”
 
                It was at this point that Bliss--who had not participated in the meal--entered, smiling at Pelorat. She was wearing a silvery blouse, very sheer.
 
                Pelorat rose at once. “I thought you had left us.”
 
                “Not at all. I had reports to make out, work to do. May I join you now, Dom?”
 
                Dom had also risen (though Trevize remained seated). “You are entirely welcome and you ravish these aged eyes.”
 
                “It is for your ravishment that I put on this blouse. Pel is above such things and Trev dislikes them.”
 
                Pelorat said, “If you think I am above such things, Bliss, I may surprise you someday.”
 
                “What a delightful surprise that would be,” Bliss said, and sat down. The two men did as well. “Please don’t let me interrupt you.”
 
                Dom said, “I was about to tell our guests the story of Eternity. --To understand it, you must first understand that there are many different Universes that can exist--virtually an infinite number. Every single event that takes place can take place or not take place, or can take place in this fashion or in that fashion, and each of an enormous number of alternatives will result in a future course of events that are distinct to at least some degree.
 
                “Bliss might not have come in just now; or she might have been with us a little earlier; or much earlier; or having come in now, she might have worn a different blouse; or even in this blouse, she might not have smiled roguishly at elderly men as is her kindhearted custom. In each of these alternatives--or in each of a very large number of other alternatives of this one event--the Universe would have taken a different track thereafter, and so on for every other variation of every other event, however minor.”
 
                Trevize stirred restlessly. “I believe this is a common speculation in quantum mechanics--a very ancient one, in fact.”
 
                “Ah, you’ve heard of it. But let us go on. Imagine it is possible for human beings to freeze all the infinite number of Universes, to step from one to another at will, and to choose which one should be made ‘real’--whatever that word means in this connection.”
 
                Trevize said, “I hear your words and can even imagine the concept you describe, but I cannot make myself believe that anything like this could ever happen.”--
 
                “Nor I, on the whole,” said Dom, “which is why I say that it would all seem to be a fable. Nevertheless, the fable states that therewere those who could step out of time and examine the endless strands of potential reality. These people were called the Eternals and when they were out of time they were said to be in Eternity.
 
                “It was their task to choose a Reality that would be most suitable to humanity. They modified endlessly--and the story goes into great detail, for I must tell you that it has been written in the form of an epic of inordinate length. Eventually they found (so it is said) a Universe in which Earth was the only planet in the entire Galaxy on which could be found a complex ecological system, together with the development of an intelligent species capable of working out a high technology.
 
                “That, they decided, was the situation in which humanity could be most secure. They froze that strand of events as Reality and then ceased operations. Now we live in a Galaxy that has been settled by human beings only, and, to a large extent, by the plants, animals, and microscopic life that they carry with them--voluntarily or inadvertently--from planet to planet and which usually overwhelm the indigenous life.
 
                “Somewhere in the dim mists of probability there are other Realities in which the Galaxy is host to many intelligences, but they are unreachable. We in our Reality are alone. From every action and every event in our Reality, there are new branches that set off, with only one in each separate case being a continuation of Reality, so that there are vast numbers of potential Universes--perhaps an infinite number--stemming from ours, but all of them are presumably alike in containing the one-intelligence Galaxy in which we live. --Or perhaps I should say that all but a vanishingly small percentage are alike in this way, for it is dangerous to rule out anything where the possibilities approach the infinite.”
 
                He stopped, shrugged slightly, and added, “At least, that’s the story. It dates back to before the founding of Gaia. I don’t vouch for its truth.”
 
                The three others had listened intently. Bliss nodded her head, as though it were something she had heard before and she were checking the accuracy of Dom’s account.
 
                Pelorat reacted with a silent solemnity for the better part of a minute and then balled his fist and brought it down upon the arm of his chair.
 
                “No,” he said is a strangled tone, “that affects nothing. There’s no way of demonstrating the truth of the story by observation or by reason, so it can’t ever be anything but a piece of speculation, but aside from that-- Suppose it’s true! The Universe we live in is still one in which only Earth has developed a rich life and an intelligent species, so that inthis Universe--whether it is the all-in-all or only one out of an infinite number of possibilities--there must be something unique in the nature of the planet Earth. We should still want to know what that uniqueness is.”
 
                In the silence that followed, it was Trevize who finally stirred and shook his head.
 
                “No, Janov,” he said, “that’s not the way it works. Let us say that the chances are one in a billion trillion--one in 1021--that out of the billion of habitable planets in the Galaxy only Earth-- through the workings of sheer chance--would happen to develop a rich ecology and, eventually, intelligence. If that is so, then one in 1021of the various strands of potential Realities would represent such a Galaxy and the Eternals picked it. We live, therefore, in a Universe in which Earth is the only planet to develop a complex ecology, an intelligent species, a high technology--not because there is something special about Earth, but because simply by chance it developed on Earth and nowhere else.
 
                “I suppose, in fact,” Trevize went on thoughtfully, “that there are strands of Reality in which only Gaia has developed an intelligent species, or only Sayshell, or only Terminus, or only some plane which inthis Reality happens to bear no life at all. And all of these very special cases are a vanishingly small percentage of the total number of Realities in which there is more than one intelligent species in the Galaxy. --I suppose that if the Eternals had looked long enough they would have found a potential strand of Reality in which every single habitable planet had developed an intelligent species.”
 
                Pelorat said, “Might you not also argue that a Reality had been found in which Earth was for some reason not as it was in other strands, but specially suited in some way for the development of intelligence? In fact, you can go further and say that a Reality had been found in which the whole Galaxy was not as it was in other strands, but was somehow in such a state of development that only Earth could produce intelligence.”
 
                Trevize said, “You might argue so, but I would suppose that my version makes more sense.”
 
                “That’s a purely subjective decision, of course--” began Pelorat with some heat, but Dom interrupted, saying “This is logic-chopping. Come, let us not spoil what is proving, at least for me, a pleasant and leisurely evening.”
 
                Pelorat endeavored to relax and to allow his heat to drain away. He smiled finally and said, “As you say, Dom.”
 
                Trevize, who had been casting glances at Bliss, who sat with mocking demurity, hands in her lap, now said, “And how didthis world come to be, Dom? Gaia, with its group consciousness?”
 
                Dom’s old head leaned back and he laughed in a high-pitched manner. His face crinkled as he said, “Fables again! I think about that sometimes, when I read what records we have on human history. No matter how carefully records are kept and filed and computerized, they grow fuzzy with time. Stories grow by accretion. Tales accumulate--like dust. The longer the time lapse, the dustier the history--until it degenerates into fables.”
 
                Pelorat said, “We historians are familiar with the process, Dom. There is a certain preference for the fable. ‘The falsely dramatic drives out the truly dull,’ said Liebel Gennerat about fifteen centuries ago. It’s called Gennerat’s Law now.”
 
                “Is it?” said Dom. “And I thought the notion was a cynical invention of my own. Well, Gennerat’s Law fills our past history with glamour and uncertainty. --Do you know what a robot is?”
 
                “We found out on Sayshell,” said Trevize dryly.
 
                “You saw one?”
 
                “No. We were asked the question and, when we answered in the negative, it was explained to us.”
 
                “I understand. --Humanity once lived with robots, you know, but it didn’t work well.”
 
                “So we were told.”
 
                “The robots were deeply indoctrinated with what are called the Three Laws of Robotics, which date back into prehistory. There are several versions of what those Three Laws might have been. The orthodox view has the following reading: ‘1) A robot may not harm a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm; a) A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings, except where such orders would conflict with the First Law; ~) A robot must protect its own existence, as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Law.’
 
                “As robots grew more intelligent and versatile, they interpreted these Laws, especially the all-overriding First, more and more generously and assumed, to a greater and greater degree, the role of protector of humanity. The protection stifled people and grew unbearable.
 
                “The robots were entirely kind. Their labors were clearly humane and were meant entirely for the benefit of all--which somehow made them all the more unbearable.
 
                “Every robotic advance made the situation worse. Robots were developed with telepathic capacity, but that meant that even human thought could be monitored, so that human behavior became still more dependent on robotic oversight.
 
                “Again robots grew steadily more like human beings in appearance, but they were unmistakably robots in behavior and being humanoid made them more repulsive. So, of course, it had to come to an end.”
 
                “Why ‘of course’?” asked Pelorat, who had been listening intently.
 
                Dom said, “It’s a matter of following the logic to the bitter end. Eventually the robots grew advanced enough to become just sufficiently human to appreciate why human beings should resent being deprived of everything human in the name of their own good. In the long run, the robots were forced to decide that humanity might be better off caring for themselves, however carelessly and ineffectively.
 
                “Therefore, it is said, it was the robots who established Eternity somehow and became the Eternals. They located a Reality in which they felt that human beings could be as secure as possible--alone in the Galaxy. Then, having done what they could to guard us and in order to fulfill the First Law in the truest sense, the robots of their own accord ceased to function and ever since we have been human beings--advancing, however we can, alone.”
 
                Dom paused. He looked from Trevize to Pelorat, and then said, “Well, do you believe all that?”
 
                Trevize shook his head slowly. “No. There is nothing like this in any historical record I have ever heard of. How about you, Janov?”
 
                Pelorat said, “There are myths that are similar in some ways.”
 
                “Come, Janov, there are myths that would match anything that any of us can make up, given sufficiently ingenious interpretation. I’m talking about history--reliable records.”
 
                “Oh well. Nothing there, as far as I know.”
 
                Dom said, “I’m not surprised. Before the robots withdrew, many parties of human beings left to colonize robotless worlds in deeper space, in order to take their own measures for freedom. They came particularly from overcrowded Earth, with its long history of resistance to robots. The new worlds were founded fresh and they did not even want to remember their bitter humiliation as children under robot nursemaids. They kept no records of it and they forgot.”
 
                Trevize said, “This is unlikely.”
 
                Pelorat turned to him. “No, Golan. It’s not at all unlikely. Societies create their own history and tend to wipe out lowly beginnings, either by forgetting them or inventing totally fictitious heroic rescues. The Imperial government made attempts to suppress knowledge of the pre-Imperial past in order to strengthen the mystic aura of eternal rule. Then, too, there are almost no records of the days before hyperspatial travel--and you know that the very existence of Earth is unknown to most people today.”
 
                Trevize said, “You can’t have it both ways, Janov. If the Galaxy has forgotten the robots, how is it that Gaia remembers?”
 
                Bliss intervened with a sudden lilt of soprano laughter. “We’re different.”
 
                “Yes?” said Trevize. “In what way?”
 
                Dom said, “Now, Bliss, leave this to me. Weare different, men of Terminus. Of all the refugee groups fleeing from robotic domination, we who eventually reached Gaia (following in the track of others who reached Sayshell) were the only ones who had learned the craft of telepathy from the robots.
 
                “Itis a craft, you know. It is inherent in the human mind, but it must be developed in a very subtle and difficult manner. It takes many generations to reach its full potential, but once well begun, it feeds on itself. We have been at it for over twenty thousand years and the sense-of-Gaia is that full potential has even now not been reached. It was long ago that our development of telepathy made us aware of group consciousness--first only of human beings; then animals; then plants; and finally, not many centuries ago, the inanimate structure of the planet itself.
 
                “Because we traced this back to the robots, we did not forget them. We considered them not our nursemaids but our teachers. We felt they had opened our mind to something we would never for one moment want them closed to. We remember them with gratitude.”
 
                Trevize said, “But just as once you were children to the robots, now you are children to the group consciousness. Have you not lost humanity now, as you had then?”
 
                “It is different, Trev. What we do now is our own choice--our own choice. That is what counts. It is not forced on us from outside, but is developed from the inside. It is something we never forget. And we are different in another way, too. We are unique in the Galaxy. There is no world like Gaia.”
 
                “How can you be sure?”
 
                “We would know, Trev. We would detect a world consciousness such as ours even at the other end of the Galaxy. We can detect the beginnings of such a consciousness in your Second Foundation, for instance, though not until two centuries ago.”
 
                “At the time of the Mule?”
 
                “Yes. One of ours.” Dom looked grim. “He was an aberrant and he left us. We were na?ve enough to think that was not possible, so we did not act in time to stop him. Then, when we turned our attention to the Outside Worlds, we became aware of what you call the Second Foundation and we left it to them.”
 
                Trevize stared blankly for several moments, then muttered, “There go our history books!” He shook his head and said in a louder tone of voice, “That was rather cowardly of Gaia, wasn’t it, to do so?” said Trevize. “He was your responsibility.”
 
                “You are right. But once we finally turned our eyes upon the Galaxy, we saw what until then we had been blind to, so that the tragedy of the Mule proved a life-saving matter to us. It was then that we recognized that eventually a dangerous crisis would come upon us. And it has--but not before we were able to take measures, thanks to the incident of the Mule.”
 
                “What sort of crisis?”
 
                “One that threatens us with destruction?”
 
                “I can’t believe that. You held off the Empire, the Mule, and Sayshell. You have a group consciousness that can pluck a ship out of space at a distance of millions of kilometers. What can you have to fear? --Look at Bliss. She doesn’t look the least bit perturbed.She doesn’t think there’s a crisis.”
 
                Bliss had placed one shapely leg over the arm of the chair and wriggled her toes at him. “Of course I’m not worried, Trev. You’ll handle it.”
 
                Trev said forcefully, “Me?”
 
                Dom said, “Gaia has brought you here by means of a hundred gentle manipulations. It is you who must face our crisis.”
 
                Trev stared at him and slowly his face turned from stupefaction into gathering rage. “Me?Why, in all of space,me ? I have nothing to do with this.”
 
                “Nevertheless, Trev,” said Dom with an almost hypnotic calmness, “you. Only you. In all of space, only you.”
    
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 	COLLISION
1.
 
  
 
       STOR GENDEBAL WAS EDGING TOWARD GAIA ALMOST AS CAUTIOUSLY AS Trevize had--and now that its star was a perceptible disc and could be viewed only through strong filters, he paused to consider.
 
                Sura Novi sat to one side, looking up at him now and then in a timorous manner.
 
                She said softly, “Master?”
 
                “What is it, Novi?” he asked abstractedly.
 
                “Are you unhappy?”
 
                He looked up at her quickly. “No. Concerned. Remember that word? I am trying to decide whether to move in quickly or to wait longer. Shall I be very brave, Novi?”
 
                “I think you are very brave all times, Master.”
 
                “To be very brave is sometimes to be foolish.”
 
                Novi smiled. “How can a master scholar be foolish? --That is a sun, is it not, Master?” She pointed to the screen.
 
                Gendibal nodded.
 
                Novi said, after an irresolute pause, “Is it the sun that shines on Trantor? Is it the Hamish sun?”
 
                Gendibal said, “No, Novi. It is a far different sun. There are many suns, billions of them.”
 
                “Ah! I had known this with my head. I could not make myself believe, however. How is it, Master, that one can know with the head --and yet not believe?”
 
                Gendibal smiled faintly, “In your head, Novi--” he began and, automatically, as he said that, he found himself in her head. He stroked it gently, as he always did, when he found himself there-- just a soothing touch of mental tendrils to keep her calm and untroubled--and he would then have left again, as he always did, had not something drawn him back.
 
                What he sensed was indescribable in any but mentalic terms but, metaphorically, Novi’s brain glowed. It was the faintest possible glow.
 
                It would not be there except for the existence of a mentalic field imposed from without--a mentalic field of an intensity so small that the finest receiving function of Gendibal’s own well-trained mind could just barely detect it, even against the utter smoothness of Novi’s mentalic structure.
 
                He said sharply, “Novi, how do you feel?”
 
                Her eyes opened wide. “I feel well, Master.”
 
                “Are you dizzy, confused? Close your eyes and sit absolutely still until I say, ‘Now.”
 
                Obediently she closed her eyes. Carefully Gendibal brushed away all extraneous sensations from her mind, quieted her thought, soothed her emotions, stroked--stroked-- He left nothing but the glow and it was so faint that he could almost persuade himself it was not there.
 
                “Now,” he said and Novi opened her eyes.
 
                “How do you feel, Novi?”
 
                “Very calm, Master. Rested.”
 
                It was clearly too feeble for it to have any noticeable effect on her.
 
                He turned to the computer and wrestled with it. He had to admit to himself that he and the computer did not mesh very well together. Perhaps it was because he was too used to using his mind directly to be able to work through an intermediary. But he was looking for a ship, not a mind, and the initial search could be done more efficiently with the help of the computer.
 
                And he found the sort of ship he suspected might be present. It was half a million kilometers away and it was much like his own in design, but it was much larger and more elaborate.
 
                Once it was located with the computer’s help, Gendibal could allow his mind to take over directly. He sent it outward--tight-beamed--and with it felt (or the mentalic equivalent of “felt”) the ship, inside and out.
 
                He then sent his mind toward the planet Gaia, approaching it more closely by several millions of kilometers of space--and withdrew. Neither process was sufficient in itself to tell him, unmistakably, which--if either--was the source of the field.
 
                He said, “Novi, I would like you to sit next to me for what is to follow.”
 
                “Master, is there danger?”
 
                “You are not to be in any way concerned, Novi. I will see to it that you are safe and secure.”
 
                “Master, I am not concerned that I be safe and secure. If there is danger, I want to be able to help you.”
 
                Gendibal softened. He said, “Novi, you have already helped. Because of you, I became aware of a very small thing it was important to be aware of. Without you, I might have blundered rather deeply into a bog and might have had to pull out only through a great deal of trouble.”
 
                “Have I done this with my mind, Master, as you once explained?” asked Novi, astonished.
 
                “Quite so, Novi. No instrument could have been more sensitive. My own mind is not; it is too full of complexity.”
 
                Delight filled Novi’s face. “I am so grateful I can help.”
 
                Gendibal smiled and nodded--and then subsided into the somber knowledge that he would need other help as well. Something childish within him objected. The job was his--his alone.
 
                Yet it could not be his alone. The odds were climbing--
 
  
 
 2.
 
  
 
 On Trantor, Quindor Shandess felt the responsibility of First Speakerhood resting upon him with a suffocating weight. Since Gendibal’s ship had vanished into the darkness beyond the atmosphere, he had called no meetings of the Table. He had been lost in his own thoughts.
 
                Had it been wise to allow Gendibal to go off on his Own? Gendibal was brilliant, but not so brilliant that it left no room for overconfidence. Gendibal’s great fault was arrogance, as Shandess’s own great fault (he thought bitterly) was the weariness of age.
 
                Over and over again, it occurred to him that the precedent of Preem Palver, flitting over the Galaxy to set things right, was a dangerous one. Could anyone else be a Preem Palver? Even Gendibal? And Palver had had his wife with him.
 
                To be sure, Gendibal had this Hamishwoman, but she was of no consequence. Palver’s wife had been a Speaker in her own right.
 
                Shandess felt himself aging from day to day as he waited for word from Gendibal--and with each day that word did not come, he felt an increasing tension.
 
                It should have been a fleet of ships, a flotilla--
 
                No. The Table would not have allowed it.
 
                And yet--
 
                When the call finally came, he was asleep--an exhausted sleep that was bringing him no relief. The night had been windy and he had had trouble falling asleep to begin with. Like a child, he had imagined voices in the wind.
 
                His last thoughts before falling into an exhausted slumber had been a wistful building of the fancy of resignation, a wish be could do so together with the knowledge he could not, for at this moment Delarmi would succeed him.
 
                And then the call came and he sat up in bed, instantly awake.
 
                “You are well?” he said.
 
                “Perfectly well, First Speaker,” said Gendibal. “Should we have visual connection for more condensed communication?”
 
                “Later, perhaps,” said Shandess. “First, what is the situation?”
 
                Gendibal spoke carefully, for he sensed the other’s recent arousal and he perceived a deep weariness. He said, “I am in the neighborhood of an inhabited planet called Gaia, whose existence is not hinted at in any of the Galactic records, as far as I know.”
 
                “The world of those who have been working to perfect the Plan? The Anti-Mules?”
 
                “Possibly, First Speaker. There is the reason to think so. First, the ship bearing Trevize and Pelorat has moved far in toward Gaia and has probably landed there. Second, there is, in space, about half a million kilometers from me, a First Foundation warship.”
 
                “There cannot be this much interest for no reason.”
 
                “First Speaker, this may not be independent interest. I am here only because I am following Trevize--and the warship may be here for the same reason. It remains only to be asked why Trevize is here.”
 
                “Do you plan to follow him in toward the planet, Speaker?”
 
                “I had considered that a possibility, but something has come up. I am now a hundred million kilometers from Gaia and I sense in the space about me a mentalic field--a homogeneous one that is excessively faint. I would not have been aware of it at all, but for the focusing effect of the mind of the Hamishwoman. It is an unusual mind; I agreed to take her with me for that very purpose.”
 
                “You were right, then, in supposing it would be so-- Did Speaker Delarmi know this, do you think?”
 
                “When she urged me to take the woman? I scarcely think so--but I gladly took advantage of it, First Speaker.”
 
                “I am pleased that you did. Is it your opinion, Speaker Gendibal, that the planet is the focus of the field?”
 
                “To ascertain that, I would have to take measurements at widely spaced points in order to see if there is a general spherical symmetry to the field. My unidirectional mental probe made this seem likely but not certain. Yet it would not be wise to investigate further in the presence of the First Foundation warship.”
 
                “Surely it is no threat.”
 
                “It may be. I cannot as yet be sure that it is not itself the focus of the field, First Speaker.”
 
                “But they--”
 
                “First Speaker, with respect, allow me to interrupt. We do not know what technological advances the First Foundation has made. They are acting with a strange self-confidence and may have unpleasant surprises for us. It must be decided whether they have learned to handle mentalics by means of some of their devices. In short, First Speaker, I am facing either a warship of mentalics or a planet of them.
 
                “If it is the warship, then the mentalics may be far too weak to immobilize me, but they might be enough to slow me--and the purely physical weapons on the warship may then suffice to destroy me. On the other hand, if it is the planet that is the focus, then to have the field detectable at such a distance could mean enormous intensity at the surface--more than even I can handle.
 
                “In either case, it will be necessary to set up a network--a total network--in which, at need, the full resources of Trantor can be placed at my disposal.”
 
                The First Speaker hesitated. “Atotal network. This has never been used, never even suggested--except in the time of the Mule.”
 
                “This crisis may well be even greater than that of the Mule, First Speaker.”
 
                “I do not know that the Table would agree.”
 
                “I do not think you should ask them to agree, First Speaker. You should invoke a state of emergency.”
 
                “What excuse can I give?”
 
                “Tell them what I have told you, First Speaker.”
 
                “Speaker Delarmi will say that you are an incompetent coward, driven to madness by your own fears.”
 
                Gendibal paused before answering. Then he said, “I imagine she will say something like that, First Speaker, but let her say whatever she likes and I will survive it. What is at stake now is not my pride or self-love but the actual existence of the Second Foundation.”
 
  
 
 3.
 
  
 
 Harla Branno smiled grimly, her lined face setting more deeply into its fleshy crags. She said, “I think we can push on with it. I’m ready for them.”
 
                Kodell said, “Do you still feel sure you know what you’re doing?”
 
                “If I were as mad as you pretend you think I am, Liono, would you have insisted on remaining on this ship with me?”
 
                Kodell shrugged and said, “Probably. I would then be here on the off chance, Madam Mayor, that I might stop you, divert you, at least slow you, before you went too far. And, of course, if you’re not mad--”
 
                “Yes?”--
 
                “Why, then I wouldn’t want to have the histories of the future give you all the mention. Let them state that I was here with you and wonder, perhaps, to whom the credit really belongs, eh, Mayor?”
 
                “Clever, Liono, clever--but quite futile. I was the power behind the throne through too many Mayoralties for anyone to believe I would permit such a phenomenon in my own administration.”
 
                “We shall see.”
 
                “No, we won’t, for such historical judgments will come after we are dead. However, I have no fears. Not about my place in history and not aboutthat ,” and she pointed to the screen.
 
                “Compor’s ship,” said Kodell.
 
                “Compor’s ship, true,” said Branno, “but without Compor aboard. One of our scoutships observed the changeover. Compor’s ship was stopped by another. Two people from the other ship boarded that one and Compor later moved off and entered the other.”
 
                Branno rubbed her hands. “Trevize fulfilled his role perfectly. I cast him out into space in order that he might serve as lightning rod and so he did. He drew the lightning. The ship that stopped Compor was Second Foundation.”
 
                “How can you be sure of that, I wonder?” said Kodell, taking out his pipe and slowly beginning to pack it with tobacco.
 
                “Because I always wondered if Compor might not be under Second Foundation control. His life was too smooth. Things always broke right for him--and he was such an expert at hyperspatial tracking. His betrayal of Trevize might easily have been the simple politics of an ambitious man--but he did it with such unnecessary thoroughness, as though there were more than personal ambition to it.”
 
                “All guesswork, Mayor.”
 
                “The guesswork stopped when he followed Trevize through multiple Jumps as easily as if there had been but one.”
 
                “He had the computer to help, Mayor.”
 
                But Branno leaned her head back and laughed. “My dear Liono, you are so busy devising intricate plots that you forget the efficacy of simple procedures. I sent Compor to follow Trevize, not because I needed to have Trevize followed. What need was there for that? Trevize, however much he might want to keep his movements secret, could not help but call attention to himself in any non-Foundation world he visited. His advanced Foundation vessel--his strong Terminus accent--his Foundation credits--would automatically surround him with a glow of notoriety. And in case of any emergency, he would automatically turn to Foundation officials for help, as he did on Sayshell, where we knew all that he did as soon as he did it-- and quite independently of Compor.
 
                “No,” she went on thoughtfully, “Compor was sent out to testCompor . And that succeeded, for we gave him a defective computer quite deliberately; not one that was defective enough to make the ship unmaneuverable, but certainly one that was insufficiently agile to aid him in following a multiple Jump. Yet Compor managed that without trouble.”
 
                “I see there’s a great deal you don’t tell me, Mayor, until you decide you ought to.”
 
                “I only keep those matters from you, Liono, that it will not hurt you not to know. I admire you and I use you, but there are sharp limits to my trust, as there is in yours for me--and please don’t bother to deny it.”
 
                “I won’t,” said Kodell dryly, “and someday, Mayor, I will take the liberty of reminding you of that. --Meanwhile, is there anything else that I ought to know now? What is the nature of the ship that stopped them? Surely, if Compor is Second Foundation, so was that ship.”
 
                “It is always a pleasure to speak to you, Liono. You see things quickly. The Second Foundation, you see, doesn’t bother to hide its tracks. It has defenses that it relies on to make those tracks invisible, even when they are not. It would never occur to a Second Foundationer to use a ship of alien manufacture, even if they knew how neatly we could identify the origin of a ship from the pattern of its energy use. They could always remove that knowledge from any mind that had gained it, so why bother taking the trouble to hide? Well, our scout ship was able to determine the origin of the ship that approached Compor within minutes of sighting it.”

                “And now the Second Foundation will wipe that knowledge from our minds, I suppose.”
 
                “If they can,” said Branno, “but they may find that things have changed.”
 
                Kodell said, “Earlier you said you knew where the Second Foundation was. You would take care of Gaia first, then Trantor. I deduce from this that the other ship was of Trantorian origin.”
 
                “You suppose correctly. Are you surprised?”
 
                Kodell shook his head slowly. “Not in hindsight. Ebling Mis, Toran Darell and Bayta Darell were all on Trantor during the period when the Mule was stopped. Arkady Darell, Bayta’s granddaughter, was born on Trantor and was on Trantor again when the Second Foundation was itself supposedly stopped. In her account of events, there is a Preem Palver who played a key role, appearing at convenient times, and he was a Trantorian trader. I should think it was obvious that the Second Foundation was on Trantor, where, incidentally, Hari Seldon himself lived at the time he founded both Foundations.”
 
                “Quite obvious, except that no one ever suggested the possibility. The Second Foundation saw to that. It is what I meant when I said they didn’t have to cover their tracks, when they could so easily arrange to have no one look in the direction of those tracks--or wipe out the memory of those tracks after they had been seen.”
 
                Kodell said, “In that case, let us not look too quickly in the direction in which they may simply be wanting us to look. How is it, do you suppose, that Trevize was able to decide the Second Foundation existed? Why didn’t the Second Foundation stop him?”
 
                Branno held up her gnarled fingers and counted on them. “First, Trevize is a very unusual man who, for all his obstreperous inability to use caution, hassomething about him that I have not been able to penetrate. He may be a special case. Second, the Second Foundation was not entirely ignorant. Compor was on Trevize’s tail at once and reported him to me. I was relied on to stop Trevize without the Second Foundation having to risk open involvement. Third, when I didn’t quite react as expected--no execution, no imprisonment, no memory erasure, no Psychic Probe of his brain--when I merely sent him out into space, the Second Foundation went further. They made the direct move of sending one of their own ships after him.”
 
                And she added with tight-lipped pleasure, “Oh, excellent lightning rod.”
 
                Kodell said, “And our next move?”
 
                “We are going to challenge that Second Foundationer we now face. In fact, we’re moving toward him rather sedately right now.”
 
  
 
 4.
 
  
 
 Gendibal and Novi sat together, side by side, watching the screen.
 
                Novi was frightened. To Gendibal, that was quite apparent, as was the fact that she was desperately trying to fight off that fright. Nor could Gendibal do anything to help her in her struggle, for he did not think it wise to touch her mind at this moment, lest he obscure the response she displayed to the feeble mentalic field that surrounded them.
 
                The Foundation warship was approaching slowly--but deliberately. It was a large warship, with a crew of perhaps as many as six, judging from past experience with Foundation ships. Her weapons, Gendibal was certain, would be sufficient in themselves to hold off and, if necessary, wipe out a fleet made up of every ship available to the Second Foundation--if those ships had to rely on physical force alone.
 
                As it was, the advance of the warship, even against a single ship manned by a Second Foundationer, allowed certain conclusions to be drawn. Even if the ship possessed mentalic ability, it would not be likely to advance into the teeth of the Second Foundation in this manner. More likely, it was advancing out of ignorance--and this might exist in any of several degrees.
 
                It could mean that the captain of the warship was not aware that Compor had been replaced, or--if aware--did not know the replacement was a Second Foundationer, or perhaps was not even aware what a Second Foundationer might be.
 
                Or (and Gendibal intended to consider everything) what if the ship did possess mentalic force and, nevertheless, advanced in this self-confident manner? That could only mean it was under the control of a megalomaniac or that it possessed powers far beyond any that Gendibal could bring himself to consider possible.
 
                But what he considered possible was not the final judgment--
 
                Carefully he sensed Novi’s mind. Novi could not sense mentalic fields consciously, whereas Gendibal, of course, could--yet Gendibal’s mind could not do so as delicately or detect as feeble a mental field as could Novi’s. This was a paradox that would have to be studied in future and might produce fruit that would in the long run prove of far greater importance than the immediate problem of an approaching spaceship.
 
                Gendibal had grasped the possibility of this, intuitively, when he first became aware of the unusual smoothness and symmetry of Novi’s mind--and he felt a somber pride in this intuitive ability he possessed. Speakers had always been proud of their intuitive powers, but how much was this the product of their inability to measure fields by straightforward physical methods and their failure, therefore, to understand what it was that they really did? It was easy to cover up ignorance by the mystical word “intuition.” And how much of this ignorance of theirs might arise from their underestimation of the importance of physics as compared to mentalics?
 
                And how much ofthat was blind pride? When he became First Speaker, Gendibal thought, this would change. There would have to be some narrowing of the physical gap between the Foundations. The Second Foundation could not face forever the possibility of destruction any time the mentalic monopoly slipped even slightly.
 
                --Indeed, the monopoly might be slipping now. Perhaps the First Foundation had advanced or there was an alliance between the First Foundation and the Anti-Mules. (That thought occurred to him now for the first time and he shivered.)
 
                His thoughts on the subject slipped through his mind with a rapidity common to a Speaker--and while he was thinking, he also remained sensitively aware of the glow in Novi’s mind, the response to the gently pervasive mentalic field about them. It wasnot growing stronger as the Foundation warship drew nearer.
 
                This was not, in itself, an absolute indication that the warship was not equipped with mentalics. It was well known that the mentalic field did not obey the inverse-square law. It did not grow stronger precisely as the square of the extent to which distance between emitter and receiver lessened. It differed in this way from the electromagnetic and the gravitational fields. Still, although mentalic fields varied less with distance than the various physical fields did, it was not altogether insensitive to distance, either. The response of Novi’s mind should show a detectable increase as the warship approached--someincrease.
 
                (How was it that no Second Foundationer in five centuries--from Hari Seldon on--had ever thought of working out a mathematical relationship between mentalic intensity and distance? This shrugging off of physics must and would stop, Gendibal silently vowed.)
 
                If the warship possessed mentalics and if it felt quite certain it was approaching a Second Foundationer, would it not increase the intensity of its field to maximum before advancing? And in that case, would not Novi’s mindsurely register an increased response of some kind?
 
                --Yet it did not!
 
                Confidently Gendibal eliminated the possibility that the warship possessed mentalics. It was advancing out of ignorance and, as a menace, it could be downgraded.
 
                The mentalic field, of course, still existed, but it had to originate on Gaia. This was disturbing enough, but the immediate problem was the ship. Let that be eliminated and he could then turn his attention to the world of the Anti-Mules.
 
                He waited. The warship would make some move or it would come close enough for him to feel confident that he could pass over to an effective offense.
 
                The warship still approached--quite rapidly now--and still did nothing. Finally Gendibal calculated that the strength of his push would be sufficient. There would be no pain, scarcely any discomfort --all those on board would merely find that the large muscles of their backs and limbs would respond but sluggishly to their desires.
 
                Gendibal narrowed the mentalic field controlled by his mind. It intensified and leaped across the gap between the ships at the speed of light. (The two ships were close enough to make hyperspatial contact--with its inevitable loss of precision--unnecessary.)
 
                And Gendibal then fell back in numbed surprise.
 
                The Foundation warship was possessed of an efficient mentalic shield that gained in density in proportion as his own field gained in intensity. --The warship was not approaching out of ignorance after all--and it had an unexpected if passive weapon.
 
  
 
 5.
 
  
 
 “Ah,” said Branno. “He has attempted an attack, Liono. See!”
 
                The needle on the psychometer moved and trembled in its irregular rise.
 
                The development of the mentalic shield had occupied Foundation scientists for a hundred and twenty years in the most secret of all scientific projects, except perhaps for Hari Seldon’s lone development of psychohistorical analysis. Five generations of human beings had labored in the gradual improvement of a device backed by no satisfactory theory.
 
                But no advance would have been possible without the invention of the psychometer that could act as a guide, indicating the direction and amount of advance at every stage. No one could explain how it worked, yet all indications were that it measured the immeasurable and gave numbers to the indescribable. Branno had the feeling (shared by some of the scientists themselves) that if ever the Foundation could explain the workings of the psychometer, they would be the equal of the Second Foundation in mind control.
 
                But that was for the future. At present, the shield would have to be enough, backed as it was by an overwhelming preponderance in physical weapons.
 
                Branno sent out the message, delivered in a male voice from which all overtones of emotion had been removed, till it was flat and deadly.
 
                “Calling the shipBright Star and its occupants. You have forcibly taken a ship of the Navy of the Foundation Federation in an act of piracy. You are directed to surrender the ship and yourselves at once or face attack.”
 
                The answer came in natural voice: “Mayor Branno of Terminus, I know you are on the ship. TheBright Star was not taken by piratical action. I was freely invited on board by its legal captain, Munn Li Compor of Terminus. I ask a period of truce that we may discuss matters of importance to each of us alike.”
 
                Kodell whispered to Branno, “Let me do the speaking, Mayor.”
 
                She raised her arm contemptuously, “The responsibility is mine, Liono.”
 
                Adjusting the transmitter, she spoke in tones scarcely less forceful and unemotional than the artificial voice that had spoken before:
 
                “Man of the Second Foundation, understand your position. If you do not surrender forthwith, we can blow your ship out of space in the time it takes light to travel from our ship to yours--and we are ready to do that. Nor will we lose by doing this, for you have no knowledge for which we need keep you alive. We know you are from Trantor and, once we have dealt with you, we will be ready to deal with Trantor. We are willing to allow you a period in which to have your say, but since you cannot have much of worth to tell us, we are not prepared to listen long.”
 
                “In that case,” said Gendibal, “let me speak quickly and to the point. Your shield is not perfect and cannot be. You have overestimated it and underestimated me. I can handle your mind and control it. Not as easily, perhaps, as if there were no shield, but easily enough. The instant you attempt to use any weapon, I will strike you--and there is this for you to understand: Without a shield, I can handle your mind smoothly and do it no harm. With the shield, however, I must smash through, which I can do, and I will be unable then to handle you either smoothly or deftly. Your mind will be as smashed as the shield and the effect will be irreversible. In other words, you cannot stop me and I, on the other hand,can stop you by being forced to do worse than killing you. I will leave you a mindless hulk. Do you wish to risk that?”
 
                Branno said, “You know you cannot do as you say.”
 
                “Do you, then, wish to risk the consequences I have described?” asked Gendibal with an air of cool indifference.
 
                Kodell leaned over and whispered, “For Seldon’s sake, Mayor--”
 
                Gendibal said (not exactly at once, for it took light--and everything at light-speed--a little over one second to travel from one vessel to the other), “I follow your thoughts, Kodell. No need to whisper. I also follow the Mayor’s thoughts. She is irresolute, so you have no need to panic just yet. And the mere fact that I know this is ample evidence that your shield leaks.”
 
                “It can be strengthened,” said the Mayor defiantly.
 
                “So can my mentalic force,” said Gendibal.
 
                “But I sit here at my ease, consuming merely physical energy to maintain the shield, and I have enough to maintain that shield for very long periods of time. You must use mentalic energy to penetrate the shield and you will tire.”
 
                “I am not tired,” said Gendibal. “At the present moment, neither of you is capable of giving any order to any member of the crew of your ship or to any crewman on any other ship. I can manage so much without any harm to you, but do not make any unusual effort to escape this control, for if I match that by increasing my own force, as I will have to do, you will be damaged as I have said.”
 
                “I will wait,” said Branno, placing her hands in her lap with every sign of solid patience. “You will tire and when you do, the orders that will go out will not be to destroy you, for you will then be harmless. The orders will be to send the main Foundation Fleet against Trantor. If you wish to save your world--surrender. A second orgy of destruction will not leave your organization untouched, as the first one did at the time of the Great Sack.”
 
                “Don’t you see that if I feel myself tiring, Mayor, which I won’t, I can save my world very simply by destroying you before my strength to do so is gone?”
 
                “You won’t do that. Your main task is to maintain the Seldon Plan. To destroy the Mayor of Terminus and thus to strike a blow at the prestige and confidence of the First Foundation, producing a staggering setback to its power and encouraging its enemies everywhere, will produce such a disruption to the Plan that it will be almost as bad for you as the destruction of Trantor. You might as well surrender.”
 
                “Are you willing to gamble on my reluctance to destroy you?”
 
                Branno’s chest heaved as she took a deep breath and let it out slowly. She then said firmly, “Yes!”
 
                Kodell, sitting at her side, paled.
 
  
 
 6.
 
  
 
 Gendibal stared at the figure of Branno, superimposed upon the volume of room just in front of the wall. It was a little flickery and hazy thanks to the interference of the shield. The man next to her was almost featureless with haze, for Gendibal had no energy to waste on him. He had to concentrate on the Mayor.
 
                To be sure, she had no image of him in return. She had no way of knowing that he too had a companion, for instance. She could make no judgment from his expressions, from his body language. In this respect, she was at a disadvantage.
 
                Everything he had said was true. Hecould smash her at the cost of an enormous expenditure of mentalic force--and in so doing, he could scarcely avoid disrupting her mind irreparably.
 
                Yet everything she had said was true as well. Destroying her would damage the Plan as much as the Mule himself had damaged it. Indeed, the new damage might be more serious, since it was now later in the game and there would be less time to retrieve the misstep.
 
                Worse still, there was Gaia, which was still an unknown quantity --with its mentalic field remaining at the faint and tantalizing edge of detection.
 
                For a moment, he touched Novi’s mind to make sure that the flow was still there. It was, and it was unchanged.
 
                She could not have sensed that touch in any way, but she turned to him and in an awed whisper said, “Master, there is a faint mist there. Is it to that you talk?”
 
                She must have sensed the mist through the small connection between their two minds. Gendibal put a finger to his lips. “Have no fear, Novi. Close your eyes and rest.”
 
                He raised his voice. “Mayor Branno, your gamble is a good one in this respect. I do not wish to destroy you at once, since I think that if I explain something to you, you will listen to reason and there will then be no need to destroy in either direction.
 
                “Suppose, Mayor, that you win out and that I surrender. What follows? In an orgy of self-confidence and in undue reliance on your mentalic shield, you and your successors will attempt to spread your power over the Galaxy with undue haste. In doing so, you will actually postpone the establishment of the Second Empire, because you will also destroy the Seldon Plan.”
 
                Branno said, “I am not surprised that you do not wish to destroy me at once and I think that, as you sit there, you will be forced to realize that you do not dare to destroy me at all.”
 
                Gendibal said, “Do not deceive yourself with self-congratulatory folly.Listen to me. The majority of the Galaxy is still non-Foundation and, to a great extent, anti-Foundation. There are even portions of the Foundation Federation itself that have not forgotten their days of independence. If the Foundation moves too quickly in the wake of my surrender, it will deprive the rest of the Galaxy of its greatest weakness--its disunity and indecision. You will force them to unite by fear and you will feed the tendency toward rebellion within.”
 
                “You are threatening with clubs of straw,” said Branno. “We have the power to win easily against all enemies, even if every world in the non-Foundation Galaxy combined against us, and even if these were helped by a rebellion in half the worlds of the Federation itself. There would be no problem.”
 
                “Noimmediate problem, Mayor. Do not make the mistake of seeing only the results that appear at once. You can establish a Second Empire merely by proclaiming it, but you will not be able to maintain it. You will have to reconquer it every ten years.”
 
                “Then we will do so until the worlds tire, as you are tiring.”
 
                “They will not tire, any more than I will. Nor will the process continue for a very long time, for there is a second and greater danger to the Pseudo-Empire you would proclaim. Since it can be temporarily maintained only by an ever-stronger military force which will be ever-exercised, the generals of the Foundation will, for the first time, become more important and more powerful than the civilian authorities. The Pseudo-Empire will break up into military regions within which individual commanders will be supreme. There will be anarchy--and a slide back into a barbarism that may last longer than the thirty thousand years forecast by Seldon before the Seldon Plan was implemented.”
 
                “Childish threats. Even if the mathematics of the Seldon Plan predicted all this, it predicts only probabilities--not inevitabilities.”
 
                “Mayor Branno,” said Gendibal earnestly. “Forget the Seldon Plan. You do not understand its mathematics and you cannot visualize its pattern. But you do not have to, perhaps. You are a tested politician; and a successful one, to judge from the post you hold; even more so, a courageous one, to judge from the gamble you are now taking. Therefore, use your political acumen. Consider the political and military history of humanity and consider it in the light of what you know of human nature--of the manner in which people, politicians, and military officers act, react, and interact--and see if I’m not right.”
 
                Branno said, “Even if you were right, Second Foundationer, it is a risk we must take. With proper leadership and with continuing technological advance--in mentalics, as well as in physics--we can overcome. Hari Seldon never calculated such advances properly. He couldn’t. Where in the Plan does it allow for the development of a mentalic shield by the First Foundation? Why should we want the Plan, in any case? We will risk founding a new Empire without it. Failure without it would, after all, be better than success with it. We do not want an Empire in which we play puppets to the hidden manipulators of the Second Foundation.”
 
                “You say that only because you do not understand what failure will be like for the people of the Galaxy.”
 
                “Perhaps!” said Branno stonily. “Are you beginning to weary, Second Foundationer?”
 
                “Not at all. --Let me propose an alternative action that you have not considered--one in which I need not surrender to you, nor you to me. --We are in the vicinity of a planet called Gaia.”
 
                “I am aware of that.”
 
                “Are you aware that it was probably the birthplace of the Mule?”
 
                “I would want more evidence than resides in your mere statement to that effect.”
 
                “The planet is surrounded by a mentalic field. It is the home of many Mules. If you accomplish your dream of destroying the Second Foundation, you will make yourselves the slaves of this planet of Mules. What harm have Second Foundationers ever done you-- specific, rather than imagined or theorized harm? Now ask yourself what harm a single Mule has done you.”
 
                “I still have nothing more than your statements.”
 
                “As long as we remain here, I can give you nothing more. --I propose a truce, therefore. Keep your shield up, if you don’t trust me, but be prepared to co-operate with me. Let us, together, approach this planet--and when you are convinced that it is dangerous, then I will nullify its mentalic field and you will order your ships to take possession of it.”
 
                “And then?”
 
                “And then, at least, it will be the First Foundation against the Second Foundation, with no outside forces to be considered. The fight will then be clear whereas now, you see, we dare not fight, for both Foundations are at bay.”
 
                “Why did you not say this before?”
 
                “I thought I might convince you that we were not enemies, so that we might co-operate. Since I have apparently failed at that, I suggest co-operation in any case.”
 
                Branno paused, her head bent in thought. Then she said, “You are trying to put me to sleep with lullabies. How will you, by yourself, nullify the mentalic field of a whole planet of Mules? The thought is so ludicrous that I cannot trust in the truth of your proposition.”
 
                “I am not alone,” said Gendibal. “Behind me is the full force of the Second Foundation--and that force, channeled through me, will take care of Gaia. ‘What’s more, it can, at any time, brush aside your shield as though it were thin fog.”
 
                “If so, why do you need my help?”
 
                “First, because nullifying the field is not enough. The Second Foundation cannot devote itself, now and forever, to the eternal task of nullifying, any more than I can spend the rest of my life dancing this conversational minuet with you. We need the physical action your ships can supply. --And besides, if I cannot convince you by reason that the two Foundations should look upon each other as allies, perhaps a co-operative venture of the greatest importance can be convincing. Deeds may do the job where words fail.”
 
                A second silence and then Branno said, “I am willing to approach Gaia more closely, if we can approach co-operatively. I make no promises beyond that.”
 
                “That will be enough,” said Gendibal, leaning toward his computer.
 
                Novi said, “No, Master, up to this point, it didn’t matter, but please make no further move. We must wait for Councilman Trevize of Terminus.”
CHAPTER NINETEEN 	DECISION
1.
 
  
 
       JANOV PELORAT SAID, WITH A SMALL TRACE OF PETULANCE IN HIS voice, “Really, Golan, no one seems to care for the fact that this is the first time in a moderately long life--nottoo long, I assure you, Bliss--in which I have been traveling through the Galaxy. Yet each time I come to a world, I am off it again and back in space before I can really have a chance to study it. It has happened twice now.”
 
                “Yes,” said Bliss, “but if you had not left the other one so quickly, you would not have met me until who knows when. Surely that justifies the first time.”
 
                “It does. Honestly, my--my dear, it does.”
 
                “And this time, Pel, you may be off the planet, but you have me --andI am Gaia, as much as any particle of it, as much as all of it.”
 
                “Youare , and surely I want no other particle of it.”
 
                Trevize, who had been listening to the exchange with a frown, said, “This is disgusting. Why didn’t Dom come with us? --Space, I’ll never get used to this monosyllabization. Two hundred fifty syllables to a name and we use just one of them. --Why didn’the come, together with all two hundred fifty syllables? If all this is so important--if the very existence of Gaia depends on it--why didn’t he come with us to direct us?”
 
                “Iam here, Trev,” said Bliss, “and I am as much Gaia as he is.” Then, with a quick sideways and upward look from her dark eyes, “Does it annoy you, then, to have me call you ‘Trev’?”
 
                “Yes, it does. I have as much right to my ways as you to yours. My name is Trevize. Two syllables. Tre-vize.”
 
                “Gladly. I do not wish to anger you, Trevize.”
 
                “I am not angry. I am annoyed.” He rose suddenly, walked from one end of the room to the other, stepping over the outstretched legs of Pelorat (who drew them in quickly), and then back again. He stopped, turned, and faced Bliss.
 
                He pointed a finger at her. “Look! I am not my own master! I have been maneuvered from Terminus to Gaia--and even when I began to suspect that this was so, there seemed no way to break the grip. And then, when I get to Gaia, I am told that the whole purpose for my arrival was to save Gaia. Why? How? What is Gaia to me--or I to Gaia--that I should save it? Is there no other of the quintillion human beings in the Galaxy who could do the job?”
 
                “Please, Trevize,” said Bliss--and there was a sudden downcast air about her, all of the gamine affectation disappearing. “Do not be angry. You see, I use your name properly and I will be very serious. Dom asked you to be patient.”
 
                “By every planet in the Galaxy, habitable or not, I don’t want to be patient. If I am so important, do I not deserve an explanation? To begin with, I ask again why Dom did not come with us? Is it not sufficiently important for him to be here on theFar Star with us?”
 
                “He is here, Trevize,” said Bliss. “While I am here, he is here, and everyone on Gaia is here, and every living thing, and every speck of the planet.”
 
                “Youare satisfied that that is so, but it’s not my way of thinking. I’m not a Gaian. We can’t squeeze the whole planet on to my ship, we can only squeeze one person on to it. We have you, and Dom is part of you. Very well. Why couldn’t we have taken Dom, and let you be part of him?”
 
                “For one thing,” said Bliss, “Pel--I mean, Pel-o-rat--asked that I be on the ship with you. I, not Dom.”
 
                “He was being gallant. Who would take that seriously?”
 
                “Oh, now, my dear fellow,” said Pelorat, rising to his feet with his face reddening, “I was quite serious. I don’t want to be dismissed like that. I accept the fact that it doesn’t matter which component of the Gaian whole is on board, and it is more pleasant for me to have Bliss here than Dom, and it should be for you as well. Come, Golan, you are behaving childishly.”
 
                “Am I? Am I?” said Trevize, frowning darkly. “All right, then, I am. Just the same,” again he pointed at Bliss, “whatever it is I am expected to do, I assure you that I won’t do it if I am not treated like a human being. Two questions to begin with-- What am I supposed to do? And why me?”
 
                Bliss was wide-eyed and backing away. She said, “Please, I can’t tell you that now. All of Gaia can’t tell you. Youmust come to the place without knowing anything to begin with. Youmust learn it all there. You must then do what you must do--but you must do it calmly and unemotionally. If you remain as you are, nothing will be of use and, one way or another, Gaia will come to an end. You must change this feeling of yours and I do not know how to change it.”
 
                “Would Dom know ifhe were here?” said Trevize remorselessly.
 
                “Domis here,” said Bliss. “He/I/we do not know how to change you or calm you. We do not understand a human being who cannot sense his place in the scheme of things, who does not feel like part of a greater whole.”
 
                Trevize said, “That is not so. You could seize my ship at a distance of a million kilometers and more--and keep us calm while we were helpless. Well, calm me now. Don’t pretend you are not capable of doing it.”
 
                “But wemustn’t . Not now. If we changed you or adjusted you in any way now, then you would be no more valuable to us than any other person in the Galaxy and we could not use you. We can only use you because you areyou --and you must remain you. If we touch you at this moment in any way, we are lost. Please. You must be calm of your own accord.”
 
                “Not a chance, miss, unless you tell me some of what I want to know.”
 
                Pelorat said, “Bliss, let me try. Please go into the other room.”
 
                Bliss left, backing slowly out. Pelorat closed the door behind her.
 
                Trevize said, “She can hear and see--sense everything. What difference does this make?”
 
                Pelorat said, “It makes a difference to me. I want to be alone with you, even if isolation is an illusion. --Golan, you’re afraid.”
 
                “Don’t be a fool.”
 
                “Of course you are. You don’t know where you’re going, what you’ll be facing, what you’ll be expected to do. You have a right to be afraid.”
 
                “But I’m not.”
 
                “Yes, you are. Perhaps you’re not afraid of physical danger in the way that I am. I’ve been afraid of venturing out into space, afraid of each new world I see, afraid of every new thing I encounter. After all, I’ve lived half a century of a constricted, withdrawn and limited life, while you have been in the Navy and in politics, in the thick and hurly-burly at home and in space. Yet I’ve tried not to be afraid and you’ve helped me. In this time that we’ve been together, you’ve been patient with me, you’ve been kind to me and understanding, and because of you, I’ve managed to master my fears and behave well. Let me, then, return the favor and help you.”
 
                “I’m not afraid, I tell you.”
 
                “Of course you are. If nothing else, you’re afraid of the responsibility you’ll be facing. Apparently there’s a whole world depending on you--and you will therefore have to live with the destruction of a whole world if you fail. Why should you have to face that possibility for a world that means nothing to you? ‘What right have they to place this load upon you? You’re not only afraid of failure, as any person would be in your place, but you’re furious that they should put you in the position where you have to be afraid.”
 
                “You’re all wrong.”
 
                “I don’t think so. Consequently let me take your place. I’ll do it. Whatever it is they expect you to do, I volunteer as substitute. I assume that it’s not something that requires great physical strength or vitality, since a simple mechanical device would outdo you in that respect. I assume it’s not something that requires mentalics, for they have enough of that themselves. It’s something that--well, I don’t know, but if it requires neither brawn nor brain, then I have everything else as well as you--and I am ready to take the responsibility.”
 
                Trevize said sharply, “Why are you so willing to bear the load?”
 
                Pelorat looked down at the floor, as though fearing to meet the other’s eyes. He said, “I have had a wife, Golan. I have known women. Yet they have never been very important to me. Interesting. Pleasant. Never very important. Yet, this one--”
 
                “Who? Bliss?”
 
                “She’s different, somehow--to me.”
 
                “By Terminus, Janov, she knows every word you’re saying.”
 
                “That makes no difference. She knows anyhow. --I want to please her. I will undertake this task, whatever it is; run any risk, take any responsibility, on the smallest chance that it will make her--think well of me.”
 
                “Janov, she’s a child.”
 
                “She’s not a child--and what you think of her makes no difference to me.”
 
                “Don’t you understand what you must seem to her?”
 
                “An old man? What’s the difference? She’s part of a greater whole and I am not--and that alone builds an insuperable wall between us. Don’t you think I know that? But I don’t ask anything of her but that she--”
 
                “Think well of you?”
 
                “Yes. Or whatever else she can make herself feel for me.”
 
                “And for that you will do my job? --But Janov, haven’t you been listening. They don’t want you; they wantme for some space-ridden reason I can’t understand.”
 
                “If they can’t have you and if they must have someone, I will be better than nothing, surely.”
 
                Trevize shook his head. “I can’t believe that this is happening. Old age is overtaking you and you have discovered youth. Janov, you’re trying to be a hero, so that you can die for that body.”
 
                “Don’t say that, Golan. This is not a fit subject for humor.”
 
                Trevize tried to laugh, but his eyes met Pelorat’s grave face and he cleared his throat instead. He said, “You’re right. I apologize. Call her in, Janov. Call her in.”
 
                Bliss entered, shrinking a little. She said in a small voice, “I’m sorry, Pel. You cannot substitute. It must be Trevize or no one.”
 
                Trevize said, “Very well. I’ll be calm. Whatever it is, I’ll try to do it. Anything to keep Janov from trying to play the romantic hero at his age.”
 
                “I know my age,” muttered Pelorat.
 
                Bliss approached him slowly, placed her hand on his shoulder. “Pel, I--I think well of you.”
 
                Pelorat looked away. “It’s all right, Bliss. You needn’t be kind.”
 
                “I’m not being kind, Pel. I think--very well of you.”
 
  
 
 2.
 
  
 
 Dimly, then more strongly, Sura Novi knew that she was Suranoviremblastiran and that when she was a child, she had been known as Su to her parents and Vito her friends.
 
                She had never really forgotten, of course, but the facts were, on occasion, buried deep within her. Never had it been buried as deeply or for as long as in this last month, for never had she been so close for so long to a mind so powerful.
 
                But now it was time. She did not will it herself. She had no need to. The vast remainder of her was pushing her portion of itself to the surface, for the sake of the global need.
 
                Accompanying that was a vague discomfort, a kind of itch that was rapidly overwhelmed by the comfort of selfness unmasked. Not in years had she been so close to the globe of Gaia.
 
                She remembered one of the life-forms she had loved on Gaia as a child. Having understood its feelings then as a dim part of her own, she recognized her own sharper ones now. She was a butterfly emerging from a cocoon.
 
  
 
 3.
 
  
 
 Stor Gendibal stared sharply and penetratingly at Novi--and with such surprise that he came within a hair of loosening his grip upon Mayor Branno. That he did not do so was, perhaps, the result of a sudden support from without that steadied him and that, for the moment, he ignored.
 
                He said, “What do you Know of Councilman Trevize, Novi?” And then, in cold disturbance at the sudden and growing complexity of her mind, he cried out, “What are you?”
 
                He attempted to seize hold of her mind and found it impenetrable. At that moment, he recognized that his hold on Branno was supported by a grip stronger than his own. He repeated, “What are you?”
 
                There was a hint of the tragic on Novi’s face. “Master,” she said, “Speaker Gendibal. My true name is Suranoviremblastiran and I am Gaia.”
 
                It was all she said in words, but Gendibal, in sudden fury, had intensified his own mental aura and with great skill, now that his blood was up, evaded the strengthening bar and held Branno on his own and more strongly than before, while he gripped Novi’s mind in a tight and silent struggle.
 
                She held him off with equal skill, but she could not keep her mind closed to him--or perhaps she did not wish to.
 
                He spoke to her as he would to another Speaker. “You have played a part, deceived me, lured me here, and you are one of the species from which the Mule was derived.”
 
                “The Mule was an aberration, Speaker. I/we are not Mules. I/we are Gaia.”
 
                The whole essence of Gaia was described in what she complexly communicated, far more than it could have been in any number of words.
 
                “A whole planet alive,” said Gendibal.
 
                “And with a mentalic field greater as a whole than is yours as an individual. Please do not resist with such force. I fear the danger of harming you, something I do not wish to do.”
 
                “Even as a living planet, you are not stronger than the sum of my colleagues on Trantor. We, too, are, in a way, a planet alive.”
 
                “Only some thousands of people in mentalic co-operation, Speaker, and you cannot draw upon their support, for I have blocked it off. Test that and you will see.”
 
                “What is it you plan to do, Gaia?”
 
                “I would hope, Speaker, that you would call me Novi. What I do now I do as Gaia, but I am Novi also--and with reference to you, I am only Novi.”
 
                “What is it you plan to do, Gaia?”
 
                There was the trembling mentalic equivalent of a sigh and Novi said, “We will remain in triple stalemate. You will hold Mayor Branno through her shield, and I will help you do so, and we will not tire. You, I suppose, will maintain your grip on me, and I will maintain mine on you, and neither one of us will tire there either. And so it will stay.”
 
                “To what end?”
 
                “As I have told you-- We are waiting for Councilman Trevize of Terminus. It is he who will break the stalemate--as he chooses.”
 
  
 
 4.
 
  
 
 The computer on board theFar Star located the two ships and Golan Trevize displayed them together on the split screen.
 
                They were both Foundation vessels. One was precisely like theFar Star and was undoubtedly Compor’s ship. The other was larger and far more powerful.
 
                He turned toward Bliss and said, “Well, do you know what’s going on? Is there anything you can now tell me?”
 
                “Yes! Do not be alarmed! They will not harm you.”
 
                “Why is everyone convinced I’m sitting here all a-tremble with panic?” Trevize demanded petulantly.
 
                Pelorat said hastily, “Let her talk, Golan. Don’t snap at her.”
 
                Trevize raised his arms in a gesture of impatient surrender. “I will not snap. Speak, lady.”
 
                Bliss said, “On the large ship is the ruler of your Foundation. With her--”
 
                Trevize said in astonishment, “The ruler? You mean Old Lady Branno?”
 
                “Surely that is not her title,” said Bliss, her lips twitching a little in amusement. “But she is a woman, yes.” She paused a little, as though listening intently to the rest of the general organism of which she was part. “Her name is Harlabranno. It seems odd to have only four syllables when one is so important on her world, but I suppose non-Gaians have their own ways.”
 
                “I suppose,” said Trevize dryly. “You would call her Brann, I think. But what is she doing here? Why isn’t she back on-- I see. Gaia has maneuvered her here, too. Why?”
 
                Bliss did not answer that question. She said, “With her is Lionokodell, five syllables, though her underling. It seems a lack of respect. He is an important official of your world. With them are four others who control the ship’s weapons. Do you want their names?”
 
                “No. I take it that on the other ship there is one man, Munn Li Compor, and that he represents the Second Foundation. You’ve brought both Foundations together, obviously. Why?”
 
                “Not exactly, Trev--I mean, Trevize--”
 
                “Oh, go ahead and say Trev. I don’t give a puff of comet gas.”
 
                “Not exactly, Trev. Compor has left that ship and has been replaced by two people. One is Storgendibal, an important official of the Second Foundation. He is called a Speaker.”
 
                “An important official? He’s got mentalic power, I imagine.”
 
                “Oh yes. A great deal.”
 
                “Will you be able to handle that?”
 
                “Certainly. The second person, on the ship with him, is Gaia.”
 
                “One ofyour people?”
 
                “Yes. Her name is Suranoviremblastiran. It should be much longer, but she has been away from me/us/rest so long.”
 
                “Is she capable of holding a high official of the Second Foundation?”
 
                “It is not she, it is Gaia who holds him. She/I/we/all are capable of crushing him.”
 
                “Is that what she’s going to do? She’s going to crush him and Branno? What is this? Is Gaia going to destroy the Foundations and set up a Galactic Empire of its own? The Mule back again? A greater Mule--”
 
                “No no, Trev. Do not become agitated. You must not. All three are in a stalemate. They are waiting.”
 
                “For what?”
 
                “For your decision.”
 
                “Here we go again.What decision? Whyme ?”
 
                “Please, Trev,” said Bliss. “It will soon be explained. I/we/she have said as much as I/we/she can for now.”
 
  
 
 5.
 
  
 
 Branno said wearily, “It is clear I have made a mistake, Liono, perhaps a fatal one.”
 
                “Is this something that ought to be admitted?” muttered Kodell through motionless lips.
 
                “They know what I think. It will do no further harm to say so. Nor do they know less about what you think if you do not move your lips. --I should have waited until the shield was further strengthened.”
 
                Kodell said, “How could you have known, Mayor? If we waited until assurance was doubly and triply and quadruply and endlessly sure, we would have waited forever. --To be sure, I wish we had not gone ourselves. It would have been well to have experimented with someone else--with your lightning rod, Trevize, perhaps.”
 
                Branno sighed. “I wanted to give them no warning, Liono. Still, there you put the finger on the nub of my mistake. I might have waited until the shield was reasonably impenetrable. Not ultimately impenetrable but reasonably so. I knew there was perceptible leakage now, but I could not bear to wait longer. To wipe out the leakage would have meant waiting past my term of office and I wanted it done inmy time--andI wanted to be on the spot. So like a fool, I forced myself to believe the shield was adequate. I would listen to no caution--to your doubts, for instance.”
 
                “We may still win out if we are patient.”
 
                “Can you give the order to fire on the other ship?”
 
                “No, I cannot, Mayor. The thought is, somehow, not something I can endure.”
 
                “Nor I. And if you or I managed to give the order, I am certain that the men on board would not follow it, that they would not be able to.”
 
                “Not under present circumstances, Mayor, but circumstances might change. As a matter of fact, a new actor appears on the scene.”
 
                He pointed to the screen. The ship’s computer had automatically split the screen as a new ship came within its ken. The second ship appeared on the right-hand side.
 
                “Can you magnify the image, Liono?”
 
                “No trouble. The Second Foundationer is skillful. We are free to do anything he is not troubled by.”
 
                “Well,” said Branno, studying the screen, “that’s theFar Star , I’m sure. And I imagine Trevize and Pelorat are on board. Then, bitterly, “Unless they too have been replaced by Second Foundationers. My lightning rod has been very efficient indeed. --If only my shield had been stronger.”
 
                “Patience!” said Kodell.
 
                A voice rang out in the confines of the ship’s control room and Branno could somehow tell it did not consist of sound waves. She heard it in her mind directly and a glance at Kodell was sufficient to tell her that he had heard it, too.
 
                It said, “Can you hear me, Mayor Branno? If you can, don’t bother saying so. It will be enough if you think so.”
 
                Branno said calmly, “What are you?”
 
                “I am Gaia.”
 
  
 
 6.
 
  
 
 The three ships were each essentially at rest, relative to the other two. All three were turning very slowly about the planet Gaia, as a distant three-part satellite of the planet. All three were accompanying Gaia on its endless journey about its sun.
 
                Trevize sat, watching the screen, tired of guessing what his role might be--what he had been dragged across a thousand parsecs to do.
 
                The sound in his mind did not startle him. It was as though he had been waiting for it.
 
                It said, “Can you hear me, Golan Trevize? If you can, don’t bother saying so. It will be enough if you think it.”
 
                Trevize looked about. Pelorat, clearly startled, was looking in various directions, as though trying to find the source. Bliss sat quietly, her hands held loosely in her lap. Trevize had no doubt, for a moment, that she was aware of the sound.
 
                He ignored the order to use thoughts and spoke with deliberate clarity of enunciation. “If I don’t find out what this is about, I will do nothing I am asked to do.”
 
                And the voice said, “You are about to find out.”
 
  
 
 7.
 
  
 
 Novi said, “You will all hear me in your mind. You are all free to respond in thought. I will arrange it so that all of you can hear each other. And, as you are all aware, we are all close enough so that at the normal light-speed of the spatial mentalic field, there will be no inconvenient delays. To begin with, we are all here by arrangement.”
 
                “In what manner?” came Branno’s voice.
 
                “Not by mental tampering,” said Novi. “Gaia has interfered with no one’s mind. It is not our way. We merely took advantage of ambition. Mayor Branno wanted to establish a Second Empire at once; Speaker Gendibal wanted to be First Speaker. It was enough to encourage these desires and to ride the wind, selectively and with judgment.”
 
                “I know how I was brought here,” said Gendibal stiffly. And indeed he did. He knew why he had been so anxious to move out into space, so anxious to pursue Trevize, so sure he could handle it all. --It was all Novi. --Oh, Novi!
 
                “You were a particular case, Speaker Gendibal. Your ambition was powerful, but there were softnesses about you that offered a shortcut. You were a person who would be kind to someone whom you had been trained to think of as beneath you in every respect. I took advantage of this in you and turned it against you. I/we am/are deeply ashamed. The excuse is that the future of the Galaxy is in hazard.”
 
                Novi paused and her voice (though she was not speaking by way of vocal cords) grew more somber, her face more drawn.
 
                “This was the time. Gaia could wait no longer. For over a century, the people of Terminus had been developing a mentalic shield. Left to themselves another generation, it would have been impervious even to Gaia and they would have been free to use their physical weapons at will. The Galaxy would not have been able to resist them and a Second Galactic Empire, after the fashion of Terminus, would have been established at once, despite the Seldon Plan, despite the people of Trantor, and despite Gaia. Mayor Branno had to be somehow maneuvered into making her move while the shield was still imperfect.
 
                “Then there is Trantor. The Seldon Plan was working perfectly, for Gaia itself labored to keep it on track with precision. And for over a century, there had been quietist First Speakers, so that Trantor vegetated. Now, however, Stor Gendibal was rising quickly. He would certainly become First Speaker and under him Trantor would take on an activist role. It would surely concentrate on physical power and would recognize the danger of Terminus and take action against it. If he could act against Terminus before its shield was perfected, then the Seldon Plan would be worked out to its conclusion in a Second Galactic Empire--after the fashion of Trantor--despite the people of Terminus and despite Gaia. Consequently Gendibal had to be somehow maneuvered into making his move before he became First Speaker.
 
                “Fortunately, because Gaia has been working carefully for decades, we have brought both Foundations to the proper place at the proper time. I repeat all this primarily so that Councilman Golan Trevize of Terminus may understand.”
 
                Trevize cut in at once and again ignored the effort to converse by thought. He spoke words firmly, “I donot understand. What is wrong with either version of the Second Galactic Empire?”
 
                Novi said, “The Second Galactic Empire--worked out after the fashion of Terminus--will be a military Empire, established by strife, maintained by strife, and eventually destroyed by strife. It will be nothing but the First Galactic Empire reborn. That is the view of Gaia.
 
                “The Second Galactic Empire--worked out after the fashion of Trantor--will be a paternalistic Empire, established by calculation, maintained by calculation, and in perpetual living death by calculation. It will be a dead end. That is the view of Gaia.”
 
                Trevize said, “And what does Gaia have to offer as an alternative?”
 
                “Greater Gaia! Galaxia! Every inhabited planet as alive as Gaia. Every living planet combined into a still greater hyperspatial life. Every uninhabited planet participating. Every star. Every scrap of interstellar gas. Perhaps even the great central black hole. A living galaxy and one that can be made favorable for all life in ways that we yet cannot foresee. A way of life fundamentally different from all that has gone before and repeating none of the old mistakes.”
 
                “Originating new ones,” muttered Gendibal sarcastically.
 
                “We have had thousands of years of Gaia to work those out.”
 
                “But not on a Galactic scale.”
 
                Trevize, ignoring the short exchange and driving to his point, said, “And what is my role in all this?”
 
                The voice of Gaia--channeled through Novi’s mind--thundered, “Choose!Which alternative is it to be?”
 
                There was a vast silence that followed and finally, in that silence, Trevize’s voice--mental at last, for he was too taken aback to speak --sounded small and still defiant. “Why me?”
 
                Novi said, “Though we recognized the moment had come when either Terminus or Trantor would become too powerful to stop--or worse yet, when both might become so powerful that a deadly stalemate would develop that would devastate the Galaxy--we still could not move. For our purposes, we needed someone--a particular someone--with the talent for rightness. We found you, Councilman. --No, we cannot take the credit. The people of Trantor found you through the man named Compor, though even they did not know what they had. The act of finding you attracted our attention to you. Golan Trevize, you have the gift of knowing the right thing to do.”
 
                “I deny it,” said Trevize.
 
                “You are, every once in a while,sure . And we want you to be sure this time on behalf of the Galaxy. You do not wish the responsibility, perhaps. You may do your best not to have to choose. Nevertheless, you will realize that it is right to do so. You will besure ! And you will then choose. Once we found you, we knew the search was over and for years we have labored to encourage a course of action that would, without direct mentalic interference, so influence events that all three of you--Mayor Branno, Speaker Gendibal, and Councilman Trevize--would be in the neighborhood of Gaia at the same time. We have done it.”
 
                Trevize said, “At this point in space, under present circumstances, is it not true, Gaia--if that is what you want me to call you--that you can overpower both the Mayor and the Speaker? Is it not true that you can establish this living Galaxy you speak of without my doing anything? Why, then, do you not?”
 
                Novi said, “I do not know if I can explain this to your satisfaction. Gaia was formed thousands of years ago with the help of robots that once, for a brief time, served the human species and now serve them no more. They made it quite clear to us that we could survive only by a strict application of the Three Laws of Robotics as applied to life generally. The First Law, in those terms, is: ‘Gaia may not harm life or, through inaction, allow life to come to harm.’ We have followed this rule through all of our history and we can do no other.
 
                “The result is that we are now helpless. We cannot force our vision of the living Galaxy upon a quintillion human beings and countless other forms of life and perhaps do harm to vast numbers. Nor can we do nothing and watch the Galaxy half-destroy itself in a struggle that we might have prevented. We do not know whether action or inaction will cost the Galaxy less; nor, if we choose action, do we know whether supporting Terminus or Trantor will cost the Galaxy less. Let Councilman Trevize decide then--and whatever that decision is, Gaia will follow it.”
 
                Trevize said, “How do you expect me to make a decision? What do I do?”
 
                Novi said, “You have your computer. The people of Terminus did not know that when they made it, they made it better than they knew. The computer on board your ship incorporates some of Gaia. Place your hands on the terminals and think. You may think Mayor Branno’s shield impervious, for instance. If you do, it is possible that she will at once use her weapons to disable or destroy the other two ships, establish physical rule over Gaia and, later on, Trantor.”
 
                “And you will do nothing to stop that?” said Trevize with astonishment.
 
                “Not a thing. If you are sure that domination by Terminus will do the Galaxy less harm than any other alternative, we will gladly help that domination along--even at the cost of our own destruction.
 
                “On the other hand, you may find Speaker Gendibal’s mentalic field and you may then join your computer-magnified push to his. He will, in that case, surely break free of me and push me back. He may then adjust the Mayor’s mind and, in combination with her ships, establish physical domination over Gaia and assure the continued supremacy of the Seldon Plan. Gaia will not move to stop that.
 
                “Or you may findmy mentalic field and join that--and then the living Galaxy will be set in motion to reach its fulfillment, not in this generation or the next, but after centuries of labor during which the Seldon Plan will continue. The choice is yours.”
 
                Mayor Branno said, “Wait! Do not make a decision just yet. May I speak?”
 
                Novi said, “You may speak freely. So may Speaker Gendibal.”
 
                Branno said, “Councilman Trevize. The last time we met on Terminus, you said, ‘The time may come, Madam Mayor, when you will ask me for an effort, and I will then do as I choose, and I will remember the past two days.’ I don’t know whether you foresaw this, or intuitively felt it would happen, or simply had what this woman who speaks of a living Galaxy calls a talent for rightness. In any case, you were right. I am asking you for an effort on behalf of the Federation.
 
                “You may, I suppose, feel that you would like to even the score with me for having arrested and exiled you. I ask you to remember that I did it for what I considered the good of the Foundation Federation. Even if I were wrong or even if I acted out of callous self-interest, remember that it was I who did it--and not the Federation. Do not now destroy the entire Federation out of a desire to balance what I alone have done to you. Remember that you are a Foundationer and a human being, that you do not want to be a cipher in the plans of the bloodless mathematicians of Trantor or less than a cipher in a Galactic mish-mash of life and nonlife. You want yourself, your descendants, your fellow-people to be independent organisms, possessing free will. Nothing else matters.
 
                “These others may tell you that our Empire will lead to bloodshed and misery--but it need not. It is our free-will choice whether this should be so or not. We may choose otherwise. And, in any case, it is better to go to defeat with free will than to live in meaningless security as a cog in a machine. Observe that you are now being asked to make a decision as a free-will human being. These things of Gaia are unable to make a decision because their machinery will not allow them to, so that they depend on you. And they will destroy themselves if you bid them to. Is this what you want for all the Galaxy?”
 
                Trevize said, “I do not know that I have free will, Mayor. My mind may have been subtly dealt with, so that I will give the answer that is desired.”
 
                Novi said, “Your mind is totally untouched. If we could bring ourselves to adjust you to suit our purposes, this whole meeting would be unnecessary. Were we that unprincipled, we could have proceeded with what we would find most pleasing to ourselves with no concern for the greater needs and good of humanity as a whole.”
 
                Gendibal said, “I believe it is my turn to speak. Councilman Trevize, do not be guided by narrow parochialism. The fact that you are Terminus-born should not lead you to believe that Terminus comes before the Galaxy. For five centuries now, the Galaxy has been operating in accordance with the Seldon Plan. In and out of the Foundation Federation, that operation has been proceeding.
 
                “You are, and have been, part of the Seldon Plan above and beyond your lesser role as Foundationer. Do not do anything to disrupt the Plan, either on behalf of a narrow concept of patriotism or out of a romantic longing for the new and untried. The Second Foundationers will in no way hamper the free will of humanity. We are guides, not despots.
 
                “And we offer a Second Galactic Empire fundamentally different from the First. Throughout human history, no decade in all the tens of thousands of years during which hyperspatial travel has existed has been completely free of bloodshed and violent death throughout the Galaxy, even in those periods when the Foundation itself was at peace. Choose Mayor Branno and that will continue endlessly into the future. The same dreary, deadly round. The Seldon Plan offers release from that at last--andnot at the price of becoming one more atom in a Galaxy of atoms, being reduced to equality with grass, bacteria, and dust.”
 
                Novi said, “What Speaker Gendibal says of the First Foundation’s Second Empire, I agree with. What he says of his own, I do not. The Speakers of Trantor are, after all, independent free-will human beings and are the same as they have always been. Are they free of destructive competition, of politics, of clawing upward at all costs? Are there no quarrels and even hatreds at the Speaker’s Table--and will they always be guides you dare follow? Put Speaker Gendibal on his honor and ask him this.”
 
                “No need to put me on my honor,” said Gendibal. “I freely admit we have our hatreds, competitions, and betrayals at the Table. But once a decision is reached, it is obeyed by all. There has never been an exception to this.”
 
                Trevize said, “What if I will not make a choice?”
 
                “You must,” said Novi. “You will know that it is right to do so and you will therefore make a choice.”
 
                “What if I try to make a choice and cannot?”
 
                “You must.”
 
                Trevize said, “How much time do I have?”
 
                Novi said, “Until you aresure , however much time that takes.”
 
                Trevize sat silently.
 
                Though the others were silent too, it seemed to Trevize that he could hear the pulsing of his bloodstream.
 
                He could hear Mayor Branno’s voice say firmly, “Free will!”
 
                Speaker Gendibal’s voice said peremptorily, “Guidance and peace!”
 
                Novi’s voice said wistfully, “Life.”
 
                Trevize turned and found Pelorat looking at him intently. He said, “Janov. Have you heard all this?”
 
                “Yes, I have, Golan.”
 
                “What do you think?”
 
                “The decision is not mine.”
 
                “I know that. But what do you think.”
 
                “I don’t know. I am frightened by all three alternatives. And yet a peculiar thought comes to me--”
 
                “Yes?”
 
                “When we first went out into space, you showed me the Galaxy. Do you remember?”
 
                “Of course.”
 
                “You speeded time and the Galaxy rotated visibly. And I said, as though anticipating this very time, ‘The Galaxy looks like a living thing, crawling through space.’ Do you think that, in a way, it is alive already?”
 
                And Trevize, remembering that moment, was suddenlysure . He remembered suddenly his feeling that Pelorat, too, would have a vital role to play. He turned in haste, anxious not to have time to think, to doubt, to grow uncertain.
 
                He placed his hands on the terminals and thought with an intensity he had never known before.
 
                He had made his decision--the decision on which the fate of the Galaxy hung.
CHAPTER TWENTY 	CONCLUSION
 1.
 
  
 
       MAYOR HARLA BRANNO HAD EVERY REASON FOR SATISFACTION. THE state visit had not lasted long, but it had been thoroughly productive.
 
                She said, as though in deliberate attempt to avoidhubris , “We can’t, of course, trust them completely.”
 
                She was watching the screen. The ships of the Fleet were, one by one, entering hyperspace and returning to their normal stations.
 
                There was no question but that Sayshell had been impressed by their presence, but they could not have failed to notice two things: one, that the ships had remained in Foundation space at all times; two, that once Branno had indicated they would leave, they were indeed leaving with celerity.
 
                On the other hand, Sayshell would not forget either that those ships could be recalled to the border at a day’s notice--or less. It was a maneuver that had combined both a demonstration of power and a demonstration of goodwill.
 
                Kodell said, “Quite right, we can’t trust them completely, but then no one in the Galaxy can be trusted completely and it is in the self-interest of Sayshell to observe the terms of the agreement. We have been generous.”
 
                Branno said, “A lot will depend on working out the details and I predict that will take months. The general brushstrokes can be accepted in a moment, but then come the shadings: just how we arrange for quarantine of imports and exports, how we weigh the value of their grain and cattle compared to ours, and so on.”
 
                “I know, but it will be done eventually and the credit will be yours, Mayor. It was a bold stroke and one, I admit, whose wisdom I doubted.”
 
                “Come, Liono. It was just a matter of the Foundation recognizing Sayshellian pride. They’ve retained a certain independence since early Imperial times. It’s to be admired, actually.”
 
                “Yes, now that it will no longer inconvenience us.”
 
                “Exactly, so it was only necessary to bend our own pride to the point of making some sort of gesture to theirs. I admit it took an effort to decide that I, as Mayor of a Galaxy-straddling Federation, should condescend to visit a provincial star-grouping, but once the decision was made it didn’t hurt too much. And it pleased them. We had to gamble that they would agree to the visit once we moved our ships to the border, but it meant being humble and smiling very broadly.”
 
                Kodell nodded. “We abandoned the appearance of power to preserve the essence of it.”
 
                “Exactly. --Who first said that?”
 
                “I believe it was in one of Eriden’s plays, but I’m not sure. We can ask one of our literary lights back home.”
 
                “If I remember. We must speed the return visit of Sayshellians to Terminus and see to it that they are given the full treatment as equals. And I’m afraid, Liono, you will have to organize tight security for them. There is bound to be some indignation among our hotheads and it would not be wise to subject them to even slight and transient humiliation through protest demonstrations.”
 
                “Absolutely,” said Kodell. “It was a clever stroke, by the way, sending out Trevize.”
 
                “My lightning rod? He worked better than I thought he would, to be honest. He blundered his way into Sayshell and drew their lightning in the form of protests with a speed I could not have believed. Space! What an excellent excuse that made for my visit--concern lest a Foundation national in any way disturbed then and gratitude for their forbearance.”
 
                “Shrewd! --You don’t think it would have been better, though, to have brought Trevize back with us?”
 
                “No. On the whole, I prefer him anywhere but at home. He would be a disturbing factor on Terminus. His nonsense about the Second Foundation served as the perfect excuse for sending him out and, of course, we counted on Pelorat to lead him to Sayshell, but I don’t want him back, continuing to spread the nonsense. We can never tell what that might lead to.”
 
                Kodell chuckled. “I doubt that we can ever find anyone more gullible than an intellectual academic. I wonder how much Pelorat would have swallowed if we had encouraged him.”
 
                “Belief in the literal existence of the mythical Sayshellian Gaia was quite enough--but forget it. We will have to face the Council when we return and we will need their votes for the Sayshellian treaty. Fortunately we have Trevize’s statement--voiceprint and all --to the effect that he left Terminus voluntarily. I will offer official regrets as to Trevize’s brief arrest and that will satisfy the Council.”
 
                “I can rely on you for the soft soap, Mayor,” said Kodell dryly. “Have you considered, though, that Trevize may continue to search for the Second Foundation?”
 
                “Let him,” said Branno, shrugging, “as long as he doesn’t do it on Terminus. It will keep him busy and get him nowhere. The Second Foundation’s continued existence is our myth of the century, as Gaia is Sayshell’s myth.”
 
                She leaned back and looked positively genial. “And now we have Sayshell in our grip--and by the time they see that, it will be too late for them to break the grip. So the Foundation’s growth continues and will continue, smoothly and regularly.”
 
                “And the credit will be entirely yours, Mayor.”
 
                “That has not escaped my notice,” said Branno, and their ship slipped into hyperspace and reappeared in the neighborhood space of Terminus.
 
  
 
 2.
 
  
 
 Speaker Stor Gendibal, on his own ship again, had every reason for satisfaction. The encounter with the First Foundation had not lasted long, but it had been thoroughly productive.
 
                He had sent back his message of carefully muted triumph. It was only necessary--for the moment--to let the First Speaker know that all had gone well (as, indeed, he might guess from the fact that the general force of the Second Foundation had never had to be used after all). The details could come later on.
 
                He would describe how a careful--and very minor--adjustment to Mayor Branno’s mind had turned her thoughts from imperialistic grandiosity to the practicality of commercial treaty; how a careful-- and rather long-distance--adjustment of the leader of the Sayshell union had led to an invitation to the Mayor of a parley and how, thereafter, a rapprochement had been reached with no further adjustments at all with Compor returning to Terminus on his own ship, to see that the agreement would be kept. It had been, Gendibal thought complacently, almost a storybook example of large results brought about by minutely crafted mentalics.
 
                It would, he was sure, squash Speaker Delarmi flat and bring about his own elevation to First Speaker very soon after the presentation of the details at a formal meeting of the Table.
 
                And he did not deny to himself the importance of Sum Novi’s presence, though that would not need to be stressed to the Speakers generally. Not only had she been essential to his victory, but she gave him the excuse he now needed for indulging his childish (and very human, for even Speakers are very human) need to exult before what he knew to be a guaranteed admiration.
 
                She did not understand anything that had happened, he knew, but she was aware that he had arranged matters to his liking and she was bursting with pride over that. He caressed the smoothness of her mind and felt the warmth of that pride.
 
                He said, “I could not have done it without you, Novi. It was because of you I could tell that the First Foundation--the people on the large ship--”
 
                “Yes, Master, I know whom you mean.”
 
                “I could tell, because of you, that they had a shield, together with weak powers of the mind. From the effect onyour mind, I could tell, exactly, the characteristics of both. I could tell how most efficiently to penetrate the one and deflect the other.”
 
                Novi said tentatively, “I do not understand exactly what it is you say, Master, but I would have done much more to help, if I could.”
 
                “I know that, Novi. But what you did was enough. It is amazing how dangerous they might have been. But caught now, before either their shield or their field had been developed more strongly, they could be stopped. The Mayor goes back now, the shield and the field forgotten, satisfied over the fact that she has obtained a commercial treaty with Sayshell that will make it a working part of the Federation. I don’t deny that there is much more to do to dismantle the work they have done on shield and field--it is something concerning which we have been remiss--but it will be done.”
 
                He brooded about the matter and went on in a lower voice, “We took far too much for granted with the First Foundation. We must place them under closer supervision. We must knit the Galaxy closer together somehow. We must make use of mentalics to build a closer co-operation of consciousness. That would fit the Plan. I’m convinced of that and I’ll see to it.”
 
                Novi said anxiously, “Master?”
 
                Gendibal smiled suddenly. “I’m sorry. I’m talking to myself. --Novi, do you remember Rufirant?”
 
                “That bone-skulled farmer who attacked you? I should say I do.”
 
                “I’m convinced that First Foundation agents, armed with personal shields, arranged that, together with all the other anomalies that have plagued us. Imagine being blind to a thing like that. But then, I was bemused into overlooking the First Foundation altogether by this myth of a mysterious world, this Sayshellian superstition concerning Gaia. There, too, your mind came in handy. It helped me determine that the source of that mentalic field was the warship and nothing else.”
 
                He rubbed his hands.
 
                Novi said timidly, “Master?”
 
                “Yes, Novi?”
 
                “Will you not be rewarded for what you have done?”
 
                “Indeed I will. Shandess will retire and I will be First Speaker. Then will come my chance to make us an active factor in revolutionizing the Galaxy.”
 
                “First Speaker?”
 
                “Yes, Novi. I will be the most important and the most powerful scholar of them all.”
 
                “The most important?” She looked woebegone.
 
                “Why do you make a face, Novi? Don’t you want me to be rewarded?”
 
                “Yes, Master, I do. --But if you are the most important scholar of them all, you will not want a Hamishwoman near you. It would not be fitting.”
 
                “Won’t I, though? Who will stop me?” He felt a gush of affection for her. “Novi, you’ll stay with me wherever I go and whatever I am. Do you think I would risk dealing with some of the wolves we occasionally have at the Table without your mind always there to tell me, even before they know themselves, what their emotions might be--your own innocent, absolutely smooth mind. Besides--” He seemed startled by a sudden revelation, “Even aside from that, I--I like having you with me and I intend having you with me. --That is, if you are willing.”
 
                “Oh, Master,” whispered Novi and, as his arm moved around her waist, her head sank to his shoulder.
 
                Deep within, where the enveloping mind of Novi could scarcely be aware of it, the essence of Gaia remained and guided events, but it was that impenetrable mask that made the continuance of the great task possible.
 
                And that mask--the one that belonged to a Hamishwoman--was completely happy. It was so happy that Novi was almost reconciled for the distance she was from herself/them/all, and she was content to be, for the indefinite future, what she seemed to be.
 
  
 
 3.
 
  
 
 Pelorat rubbed his hands and said, with carefully controlled enthusiasm, “How glad I am to be back on Gaia.”
 
                “Umm,” said Trevize abstractedly.
 
                “You know what Bliss has told me? The Mayor is going back to Terminus with a commercial treaty with Sayshell. The Speaker from the Second Foundation is going back to Trantor convinced that he has arranged it--and that woman, Novi, is going with him to see to it that the changes that will bring about Galaxia are initiated. And neither Foundation is in the least aware that Gaia exists. It’s absolutely amazing.”
 
                “I know,” said Trevize. “I was told all this, too. But we know that Gaia exists and we can talk.”
 
                “Bliss doesn’t think so. She says no one would believe us, and we would know that. Besides, I, for one, have no intention of ever leaving Gaia.”
 
                Trevize was pulled out of his inner musing. He looked up and said, “What?”
 
                “I’m going to stay here. --You know, I can’t believe it. Just weeks ago, I was living a lonely life on Terminus, the same life I had lived for decades, immersed in my records and my thoughts and never dreaming anything but that I would go to my death, whenever it might be, still immersed in my records and my thoughts and still living my lonely life--contentedly vegetating. Then, suddenly and unexpectedly, I became a Galactic traveler; I was involved with a Galactic crisis; and--do not laugh, Golan--I have found Bliss.”
 
                “I’m not laughing, Janov,” said Trevize, “but are you sure you know what you’re doing?”
 
                “Oh yes. This matter of Earth is no longer important to me. The fact that it was the only world with a diverse ecology and with intelligent life has been adequately explained. The Eternals, you know.”
 
                “Yes, I know. And you’re going to stay on Gaia?”
 
                “Absolutely. Earth is the past and I’m tired of the past. Gaia is the future.”
 
                “You’re not part of Gaia, Janov. Or do you think you can become part of it?”
 
                “Bliss says that I can become somewhat a part of it--intellectually if not biologically. She’ll help, of course.”
 
                “But since sheis part of it, how can you two find a common life, a common point of view, a common interest--”
 
                They were in the open and Trevize looked gravely at the quiet, fruitful island, and beyond it the sea, and on the horizon, purpled by distance, another island--all of it peaceful, civilized, alive, and a unit.
 
                He said, “Janov, she is a world; you are a tiny individual. What if she gets tired of you? She is young--”
 
                “Golan, I’ve thought of that. I’ve thought of nothing but that for days. I expect her to grow tired of me; I’m no romantic idiot. But whatever she gives me till then will be enough. She has already given me enough. I have received more from her than I dreamed existed in life. If I saw her no more from this moment on, I have ended the winner.”
 
                “I don’t believe it,” said Trevize gently. “I think youare a romantic idiot and, mind you, I wouldn’t want you any other way. Janov, we haven’t known each other for long, but we’ve been together every moment for weeks and--I’m sorry if it sounds silly--I like you a great deal.”
 
                “And I, you, Golan,” said Pelorat.
 
                “And I don’t want you hurt. I must talk to Bliss.”
 
                “No no. Please don’t. You’ll lecture her.”
 
                “I won’t lecture her. It’s not entirely to do with you--and I want to talk to her privately. Please, Janov, I don’t want to do it behind your back, so grant me your willingness to have me talk to her and get a few things straight. If I am satisfied, I will give you my heartiest congratulations and goodwill--and I will forever hold my peace, whatever happens.”
 
                Pelorat shook his head. “You’ll ruin things.”
 
                “I promise I won’t Ibeg you--”
 
                “Well-- But do be careful, my dear fellow, won’t you?”
 
                “You have my solemn word.”
 
  
 
 4.
 
  
 
 Bliss said, “Pel says you want to see me.”
 
                Trevize said, “Yes.”
 
                They were indoors, in the small apartment allotted to him.
 
                She sat down gracefully, crossed her legs, and looked up at him shrewdly, her beautiful brown eyes luminous and her long, dark hair glistening.
 
                She said, “You disapprove of me, don’t you? You have disapproved of me from the start.”
 
                Trevize remained standing. He said, “You are aware of minds and of their contents. You know what I think of you and why.”
 
                Slowly Bliss shook her head. “Your mind is out of bounds to Gaia. You know that. Your decision was needed and it had to be the decision of a clear and untouched mind. When your ship was first taken, I placed you and Pel within a soothing field, but that was essential. You would have been damaged--and perhaps rendered useless for a crucial time--by panic or rage. And that was all. I could never go beyond that and I haven’t--so I don’t know what you’re thinking.”
 
                Trevize said, “The decision I had to make has been made. I decided in favor of Gaia and Galaxia. Why, then, all this talk of a clear and untouched mind? You have what you want and you can do with me now as you wish.”
 
                “Not at all, Trev. There are other decisions that may be needed in the future. You remain what you are and, while you are alive, you are a rare natural resource of the Galaxy. Undoubtedly there are others like you in the Galaxy and others like you will appear in the future, but for now we know of you--and only you. We still cannot touch you.”
 
                Trevize considered. “You are Gaia and I don’t want to talk to Gaia. I want to talk to you as an individual, if that has any meaning at all.”
 
                “It has meaning. We are far from existing in a common melt. I can block off Gaia for a period of time.”
 
                “Yes,” said Trevize. “I think you can. Have you now done so?”
 
                “I have now done so.”
 
                “Then, first, let me tell you that you have played games. You did not enter my mind to influence my decision, perhaps, but you certainly entered Janov’s mind to do so, didn’t you?”
 
                “Do you think I did?”
 
                “I think you did. At the crucial moment, Pelorat reminded me of his own vision of the Galaxy as alive and the thought drove me on to make my decision at that moment. The thought may have been his, but yours was the mind that triggered it, was it not?”
 
                Bliss said, “The thought was in his mind, but there were many thoughts there. I smoothed the path before that reminiscence of his about the living Galaxy--and not before any other thought of his. That particular thought, therefore, slipped easily out of his consciousness and into words. Mind you, I did not create the thought. It was there.”
 
                “Nevertheless, that amounted to an indirect tampering with the perfect independence of my decision, did it not?”
 
                “Gaia felt it necessary.”
 
                “Did it? --Well, it may make you feel better--or nobler--to know that although Janov’s remark persuaded me to make the decision at that moment, it was the decision I think I would have made even if he had said nothing or if he had tried to argue me into a decision of a different kind. I want you to know that.”
 
                “I am relieved,” said Bliss coolly. “Is that what you wanted to tell me when you asked to see me?”
 
                “No.”
 
                “What else is there?”
 
                Now Trevize sat down in a chair he had drawn opposite her so that their knees nearly touched. He leaned toward her.
 
                “When we approached Gaia, it was you on the space station. It was you who trapped us; you who came out to get us; you who have remained with us ever since--except for the meal with Dom, which you did not share with us. In particular, it was you on theFar Star with us, when the decision was made. Always you.”
 
                “I am Gaia.”
 
                “That does not explain it. A rabbit is Gaia. A pebble is Gaia. Everything on the planet is Gaia, but they are not all equally Gaia. Some are more equal than others. Why you?”
 
                “Why do you think?”
 
                Trevize made the plunge. He said, “Because I don’t think you’re Gaia. I think you’re more than Gaia.”
 
                Bliss made a derisive sound with her lips.
 
                Trevize kept to his course. “At the time I was making the decision, the woman with the Speaker--”
 
                “He called her Novi.”
 
                “This Novi, then, said that Gaia was set on its course by the robots that no longer exist and that Gaia was taught to follow a version of the Three Laws of Robotics.”
 
                “That is quite true.”
 
                “And the robots no longer exist?”
 
                “So Novi said.”
 
                “So Novi didnot say. I remember her exact words. She said: ‘Gaia was formed thousands of years ago with the help of robots that once, for a brief time, served The human species and now serve them no more.”
 
                “Well, Trev, doesn’t that mean they exist no more?”
 
                “No, it means they serve no more. Might they not rule instead?”
 
                “Ridiculous!”
 
                “Or supervise? Why were you there at the time of the decision? You did not seem to be essential. It was Novi who conducted matters and she was Gaia. What need of you? Unless--”
 
                “Well? Unless?”
 
                “Unless you are the supervisor whose role it is to make certain that Gaia does not forget the Three Laws. Unless you are a robot, so cleverly made that you cannot be told from a human being.”
 
                “If I cannot be told from a human being, how is it you think that you can tell?” asked Bliss with a trace of sarcasm.
 
                Trevize sat back. “Do you not all assure me I have the faculty of beingsure ; of making decisions, seeing solutions, drawing correct conclusions. I don’t claim this; it is whatyou say of me. Well, from the moment I saw you I felt uneasy. There was something wrong with you. I am certainly as susceptible to feminine allure as Pelorat is--more so, I should think--and you are an attractive woman in appearance. Yet not for one moment did I feel the slightest attraction.”
 
                “You devastate me.”
 
                Trevize ignored that. He said, “When you first appeared on our ship, Janov and I had been discussing the possibility of a nonhuman civilization on Gaia, and when Janov saw you, he asked, in his innocence, ‘Are you human?’ Perhaps a robot must answer the truth, but I suppose it can be evasive. You merely said, ‘Don’t Ilook human?’ Yes, you look human, Bliss, but let me ask you again. Are you human?”
 
                Bliss said nothing and Trevize continued. “I think that even at that first moment, I felt you were not a woman. You are a robot and I could somehow tell. And because of my feeling, all the events that followed had meaning for me--particularly your absence from the dinner.”
 
                Bliss said, “Do you think I cannot eat, Trev? Have you forgotten I nibbled a shrimp dish on your ship? I assure you that I am able to eat and perform any of the other biological functions. --Including, before you ask, sex. And yet that in itself, I might as well tell you, does not prove that I am not a robot. Robots had reached the pitch of perfection, even thousands of years ago, where only by their brains were they distinguishable from human beings, and then only by those able to handle mentalic fields. Speaker Gendibal might have been able to tell whether I were robot or human, if he had bothered even once to consider me. Of course, he did not.”
 
                “Yet, though I am without mentalics, I am nevertheless convinced you are a robot”
 
                Bliss said, “But what if I am? I admit nothing, but I am curious. What if I am?”
 
                “You have no need to admit anything. I know you are a robot If I needed a last bit of evidence, it was your calm assurance that you could block off Gaia and speak to me as an individual. I don’t think you could do that if you were part of Gaia--but you are not You are a robot supervisor and, therefore, outside of Gaia. I wonder, come to think of it, how many robot supervisors Gaia requires and possesses?”
 
                “I repeat: I admit nothing, but I am curious. What if I am a robot?”
 
                “In that case, what I want to know is: What do you want of Janov Pelorat? He is my friend and he is, in some ways, a child. He thinks he loves you; he thinks he wants only what you are willing to give and that you have already given him enough. He doesn’t know --and cannot conceive--the pain of the loss of love or, for that matter, the peculiar pain of knowing that you are not human--”
 
                “Doyou know the pain of lost love?”
 
                “I have had my moments. I have not led the sheltered life of Janov. I have not had my life consumed and anesthetized by an intellectual pursuit that swallowed up everything else, even wife and child. He has. Now suddenly, he gives it all up for you. I do not want him hurt. I will not have him hurt. If I have served Gaia, I deserve a reward--and my reward is your assurance that Janov Pelorat’s well-being will be preserved.”
 
                “Shall I pretend I am a robot and answer you?”
 
                Trevize said, “Yes. And right now.”
 
                “Very well, then. Suppose I am a robot, Trev, and suppose I am in a position of supervision. Suppose there are a few, a very few, who have a similar role to myself and suppose we rarely meet. Suppose that our driving force is the need to care for human beings and suppose there are no true humans beings on Gaia, because all are part of an overall planetary being.
 
                “Suppose that it fulfills us to care for Gaia--but not entirely. Suppose there is something primitive in us that longs for a human being in the sense that existed when robots were first formed and designed. Don’t mistake me; I do not claim to be age-old (assuming I am a robot). I am as old as I told you I was or, at least, (assuming I am a robot) that has been the term of my existence. Still, (assuming I am a robot) my fundamental design would be as it always was and I would long to care for a true human being.
 
                “Pel is a human being. He is not part of Gaia. He is too old to ever become a true part of Gaia. He wants to stay on Gaia with me, for he does not have the feelings about me that you have. He does not think that I am a robot. Well, I want him, too. If you assume that I am a robot, you see that I would. I am capable of all human reactions and I would love him. If you were to insist I was a robot, you might not consider me capable of love in some mystic human sense, but you would not be able to distinguish my reactions from that which you would call love--so what difference would it make?”
 
                She stopped and looked at him--intransigently proud.
 
                Trevize said, “You are telling me that you would not abandon him?”
 
                “If you assume that I am a robot, then you can see for yourself that by First Law I could never abandon him, unless he ordered me to do so and I were, in addition, convinced that he meant it and that I would be hurting him more by staying than by leaving.”
 
                “Would not a younger man--”
 
                “What younger man? You are a younger man, but I do not conceive you as needing me in the same sense that Pel does, and, in fact, you do not want me, so that the First Law would prevent me from attempting to cling to you.”
 
                “Not me. Another younger man--”
 
                “There is no other. Who is there on Gaia other than Pel and yourself that would qualify as human beings in the non-Gaian sense?”
 
                Trevize said, more softly, “And if you arenot a robot?”
 
                “Make up your mind,” said Bliss.
 
                “I say,if you are not a robot?”
 
                “Then I say that, in that case, you have no right to say anything at all. It is for myself and for Pel to decide.”
 
                Trev said, “Then I return to my first point. I want my reward and that reward is that you will treat him well. I won’t press the point of your identity. Simply assure me, as one intelligence to another, that you will treat him well.”
 
                And Bliss said softly, “I will treat him well--not as a reward to you, but because I wish to. It is my earnest desire. I will treat him well.” She called “Pel!” And again, “Pel!”
 
                Pelorat entered from outside, “Yes, Bliss.”
 
                Bliss held out her hand to him. “I think Trev wants to say something.”
 
                Pelorat took her hand and Trevize then took the doubled hand in his two. “Janov,” he said, “I am happy for both of you.”
 
                Pelorat said, “Oh, my dear fellow.”
 
                Trevize said, “I will probably be leaving Gaia. I go now to speak to Dom about that. I don’t know when or if we will meet again, Janov, but, in any case, we did well together.”
 
                “We did well,” said Pelorat, smiling.
 
                “Good-bye, Bliss, and, in advance, thank you.”
 
                “Good-bye, Trev.”
 
                And Trevize, with a wave of his hand, left the house.
 
  
 
 5.
 
  
 
 Dom said, “You did well, Trev. --But then, you did as I thought you would.”
 
                They were once more sitting over a meal, as unsatisfactory as the first had been, but Trevize did not mind. He might not be eating on Gaia again.
 
                He said, “I did as I thought you would, but not, perhaps, for the reason you thought I would.”
 
                “Surely you were sure of the correctness of your decision.”
 
                “Yes, I was, but not because of any mystic grip I have on certainty. If I chose Galaxia, it was through ordinary reasoning--the sort of reasoning that anyone else might have used to come to a decision. Would you care to have me explain?”
 
                “I most certainly would, Trev.”
 
                Trevize said, “There were three things I might have done. I might have joined the First Foundation, or joined the Second Foundation, or joined Gaia.
 
                “If I had joined the First Foundation, Mayor Branno would have taken immediate action to establish domination over the Second Foundation and over Gaia. If I had joined the Second Foundation, Speaker Gendibal would have taken immediate action to establish domination over the First Foundation and over Gaia. In either case, what would have taken place would have been irreversible--and if either were the wrong solution, it would have been irreversibly catastrophic.
 
                “If I joined with Gaia, however, then the First Foundation and the Second Foundation would each have been left with the conviction of having won a relatively minor victory. All would then have continued as before, since the building of Galaxia, I had already been told, would take generations, even centuries.
 
                “Joining with Gaia was my way of temporizing, then, and of making sure that there would remain time to modify matters--or even reverse them--if my decision were wrong.”
 
                Dom raised his eyebrows. His old, almost cadaverous face remained otherwise expressionless. He said in his piping voice, “And is it your opinion that your decision may turn out wrong?”
 
                Trevize shrugged. “I don’t think so, but there is one thing I must do in order that I might know. It is my intention to visit Earth, if I can find that world.”
 
                “We will certainly not stop you if you wish to leave us, Trev--”
 
                “I do not fit on your world.”
 
                “No more than Pel does, yet you are as welcome to remain as he is. Still, we will not hold you. --But tell me, why do you wish to visit Earth?”
 
                Trevize said, “I rather think you understand.”
 
                “I do not.”
 
                “There is a piece of information you withheld from me, Dom. Perhaps you had your reasons, but I wish you had not.”
 
                Dom said, “I do not follow you.”
 
                “Look, Dom, in order to make my decision, I used my computer and for a brief moment I found myself in touch with the minds of those about me--Mayor Branno, Speaker Gendibal, Novi. I caught glimpses of a number of matters that, in isolation, meant little to me, as, for example, the various effects Gaia, through Novi, had produced on Trantor--effects that were intended to maneuver the Speaker into going to Gaia.”
 
                “Yes?”
 
                “And one of those things was the clearing from Trantor’s library of all references to Earth.”
 
                “The clearing of references to Earth?”
 
                “Exactly. So Earth must be important--and not only does it appear that the Second Foundation must know nothing about it, but that I must not, either. And if I am to take the responsibility for the direction of Galactic development, I do not willingly accept ignorance. Would you consider telling me why it was so important to keep knowledge of Earth hidden?”
 
                Dom said solemnly, “Trev, Gaia knows nothing about such clearance. Nothing!”
 
                “Are you telling me that Gaia is not responsible?”
 
                “It is not responsible.”
 
                Trevize thought for a while, the tip of his tongue moving slowly and meditatively over his lips. “Who was responsible, then?”
 
                “I don’t know. I can see no purpose in it.”
 
                The two men stared at each other and then Dom said, “You are right. We had seemed to have reached a most satisfactory conclusion, but while this point remains unsettled, we dare not rest. --Stay a while with us and let us see what we can reason out. Then you can leave, with our full help.”
 
                “Thank you,” said Trevize.


AFTERWORD BY THE AUTHOR
      THIS BOOK WHILE SELF-CONTAINED, IS A CONTINUATION OFThe Foundation Trilogy , which is made up of three books:Foundation ,Foundation and Empire , andSecond Foundation .
 
                In addition, there are other books I have written which, while not dealing with the Foundations directly, are set in what we might call “the Foundation universe.”
 
                Thus, the events inThe Stars, Like Dust andThe Currents of Space take place in the years when Trantor was expanding toward Empire, while the events inPebble in the Sky take place when the First Galactic Empire was at the height of its power. InPebble , Earth is central and some of the material in it is alluded to tangentially in this new book.
 
                In none of the earlier books of the Foundation universe were robots mentioned. In this new book, however, there are references to robots. In this connection, you may wish to read my robot stories. The short stories are to be found inThe Complete Robot , while the two novels,The Caves of Steel andThe Naked Sun , describe the robotic period of the colonization of the Galaxy.
 
                If you wish an account of the Eternals and the way in which they adjusted human history, you will find it (not entirely consistent with the references in this new book) inThe End of Eternity .
 
                All the books mentioned existed as Doubleday hardcovers, to begin with.The Foundation Trilogy andThe Complete Robot are still in print in hardcover. Of the others,Pebble in the Sky andThe End of Eternity are included in the omnibus volumeThe Far Ends of Time and Earth , whileThe Stars, Like Dust andThe Currents of Space are in the omnibus volumePrisoners of the Stars . Both omnibus volumes are in print in hardcover. As forThe Caves of Steel andThe Naked Sun , they are included in the omnibus volumeThe Robot Novels , still available from the Science Fiction Book Club. And all are in print in softcover editions, of course.

ＴｈｅＥｎｄ
