
PART V 	EPILOGUE
I am Hari Seldon. Former First Minister to Emperor Cleon I. Professor Emeritus of Psychohistory at Streeling University on Trantor. Director of the Psychohistory Research Project. Executive Editor of the Encyclopedia Galactica. Creator of the Foundation.
    It all sounds quite impressive, I know. I have done a great deal in my eighty-one years and I am tired. Looking back over my life, I wonder if I could have-should have-done certain things differently. For instance: Was I so concerned with the grand sweep of psychohistory that the people and events that intersected my life sometimes seemed inconsequential by comparison?
    Perhaps I neglected to make some small incidental adjustments here or there that would have in no way compromised the future of humanity but might have dramatically improved the life of an individual dear to me. -Yugo, Raych .     I can't help but wonder .     Was there something I could have done to save my beloved Dors?
    Last month I finished recording the Crisis holograms. My assistant, Gaal Dornick, has taken them to Terminus to oversee their installation in the Seldon Vault. He will make sure that the Vault is sealed and that the proper instructions are left for the eventual openings of the Vault, during the Crises.
    I'll be dead by then, of course.
    What will they think, those future Foundationers, when they see me (or, more accurately, my hologram) during the First Crisis, almost fifty years from now? Will they comment on how old I look or how weak my voice is or how small I seem, bundled in this wheelchair? Will they understand-appreciate-the message I've left for them? -Ah well, there's really no point in speculating. As the ancients would say: The die is cast.
    I heard from Gaal yesterday. All is going well on Terminus. Bor Alurin and the Project members are flourishing in "exile." I shouldn't gloat, but I can't help but chuckle when I recall the self-satisfied look on the face of that pompous idiot Linge Chen when he banished the Project to Terminus two years ago. Although ultimately the exile was couched in terms of an Imperial Charter ("A state-supported scientific institution and part of the personal domain of His August Majesty, the Emperor"-the Chief Commissioner wanted us off Trantor and out of his hair, but he could not bear the thought of giving up complete control), it is still a source of secret delight to know that it was Las Zenow and I who chose Terminus as Foundation's home.
    My one regret where Linge Chen is concerned is that we were not able to save Agis. That Emperor was a good man and a noble leader, even if he was Imperial in name only. His mistake was to believe in his title and the Commission of Public Safety would not tolerate the burgeoning Imperial independence.
    I often wonder what they did to Agis-was he exiled to some remote Outer World or assassinated like Cleon?
    The boy-child who sits on the throne today is the perfect puppet Emperor. He obeys every word Linge Chen whispers in his ear and fancies himself a budding statesman. The Palace and trappings of Imperial life are but toys to him in some vast fantastical game.
    What will I do now? With Gaal finally gone to join the Terminus group, I am utterly alone. I hear from Wanda occasionally. The work at Star's End continues on course; in the past decade she and Stettin have added dozens of mentalics to their number. They increasingly grow in power. It was the Star's End contingent-my secret Foundation-who pushed Linge Chen into sending the Encyclopedists to Terminus.
    I miss Wanda. It has been many years since I've seen her, sat with her quietly, holding her hand. When Wanda left, even though I had asked her to go, I thought I would die of heartbreak. That was, perhaps, the most difficult decision I ever had to make and, although I never told her, I almost decided against it. But for the Foundation to succeed, it was necessary for Wanda and Stettin to go to Star's End. Psychohistory decreed it, -so perhaps it wasn't really my decision, after all.
    I still come here every day, to my office in the Psychohistory Building. I remember when this structure was filled with people, day and night. Sometimes I feel as if it's filled with voices, those of my long-departed family, students, colleagues-but the offices are empty and silent. The hallways echo with the whirr of my wheelchair motor.
    I suppose I should vacate the building, return it to the University to allocate to another department. But somehow it's hard to let go of this place. There are so many memories .    
    All I have now is this, my Prime Radiant. This is the means by which psychohistory can be computed, through which every equation in my Plan may be analyzed, all here in this amazing, small black cube. As I sit here, this deceptively simple-looking tool in the palm of my hand, I wish I could show it to R. Daneel Olivaw .    
    But I am alone, and need only to close a contact for the office lights to dim. As I settle back in my wheelchair, the Prime Radiant activates, its equations spreading around me in three-dimensional splendor. To the untrained eye, this multicolored swirl would be merely a jumble of shapes and numbers, but for me-and Yugo, Wanda, Gaal-this is psychohistory, come to life.
    What I see before me, around me, is the future of humanity. Thirty thousand years of potential chaos, compressed into a single millennium .    
    That patch, glowing more strongly day by day, is the Terminus equation. And there-skewed beyond repair-are the Trantor figures. But I can see .     yes, softly beaming, a steady light of hope .     Star's End!
    This-this-was my life's work. My past-humanity's future. Foundation. So beautiful, so alive. And nothing can .    
    Dors!


    SELDON, HARI- .     found dead, slumped over his desk in his office at Streeling University in 12,069 G.E. (1 F.E.). Apparently Seldon had been working up to his last moments on psychohistorical equations; his activated Prime Radiant was discovered clutched in his hand .      
    According to Seldon's instructions, the instrument was shipped to his colleague Gaal Dornick who had recently emigrated to Terminus .      
    Seldon's body was jettisoned into space, also in accordance with instructions he'd left. The official memorial service on Trantor was simple, though well attended. It is worth noting that Seldon's old friend former First Minister Eto Demerzel attended the event. Demerzel had not been seen since his mysterious disappearance immediately following the Joranumite Conspiracy during the reign of Emperor Cleon I. Attempts by the Commission of Public Safety to locate Demerzel in the days following the Seldon memorial proved to be unsuccessful .      
    Wanda Seldon, Hari Seldon's granddaughter, did not attend the ceremony. It was rumored that she was grief-stricken and had refused all public appearances. To this day, her whereabouts from then on remain unknown .      
    It has been said that Hari Seldon left this life as he lived it, for he died with the future he created unfolding all around him .      
    ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

The End
尾声
　　我是哈里•谢顿，克里昂大帝一世御前首相、川陀大学川陀分校心理史学系荣退教授、 心理史学研究计划主持人、《银河百科全书》执行编辑、基地的创造者。
这些头衔都相当动听，我很清楚。在八十一年的生命中，我做了很多事，如今我已累了。 回顾这一生，我时常自问，是否有什么事能够——或应该去改变的。比如说，我是不是太过关切心理史学的壮阔远景，以致相较之下，忽略了与我生命交汇的人与事？
或许我可以在不危及人类未来的前提下，在某些地方做些小小的调整，如此一来，说不定我就能改变我所爱之人的命运。雨果、芮奇……我忍不住自问……当初我是否有可能挽救我挚爱的铎丝？
上个月，我完成了“危机全息讲话”的录制工作。我的助手盖尔•多尼克已抵达端点星，准备将它安装于谢顿穹窿。他将亲自监督整个过程，确定穹窿事后会密封起来，并留下指示， 好让穹窿在每次危机发生时重新开启。 当然，那时我已经死了。
大约五十年后，当首度危机来临，那些未来的基地人看到我的时候（更精确地说，是我的全息像），他们会怎么想呢？他们会对我评头论足，说我看来多么苍老、我的声音多么微弱，或禁锢在轮椅上的我显得多渺小吗？他们能了解——体会——我留给他们的讯息吗？啊， 算了，臆测这些实在没有意义。正如古人所云：骰子已经掷下。
昨天我接到盖尔的来讯。端点星上一切顺利，玻尔•艾鲁云与计划成员的“放逐”生涯 渐入佳境。我不该暗喜，但每当我想起两年前，凌吉•辰那个笨家伙决定将谢顿计划流放到端点星时，他脸上傲慢自满的表情，我就忍不住窃笑。虽然我们的放逐表面上是以一纸皇帝特许状执行（状上写着：“端点星为神圣威武的皇帝陛下直辖的领域，今特成立一国立科学机构……”——凌吉•辰要我们滚出川陀，离他越远越好，但又不甘心完全放弃控制权）， 但一想到其实是拉斯•齐诺与我选择端点星作为基地的家，我仍会一个人乐上半天。
提到凌吉•辰这个人，我最大的遗憾是未能救出艾吉思。艾吉思是个好人，是个高贵的领导者，虽然他只是有名无实的皇帝。他犯的错误是太相信自己的头衔，而公共安全委员会是不可能容忍独立的皇权萌芽。
我常纳闷他们如何处置了艾吉思。他是被放逐到某个遥远的外围世界，还是像克里昂一样遇刺了？
今天坐在皇位上的男孩是个标准的傀儡皇帝。他对凌吉•辰言听计从，幻想自己是个新生代政治家。对他而言，皇宫以及帝王生活的锦衣玉食，不过是一场梦幻游戏中的玩具罢了。现在，我终于又孤独一人，盖尔也已离开，加入端点星的阵容，我要做什么呢？偶尔我会有婉达的消息，群星尽头的工作仍照原定计划进行。过去十年间，她与史铁亭网罗了数十名精神异人，秘密基地的力量持续壮大。正是这支秘密分遣队影响了凌吉•辰，让他决定将 百科全书编者送到端点星。
我很想念婉达。上次见到她，已经是多年前的事。那时我只是默默握着她的手，什么话都说不出来。尽管是我要她走的，但在她离去后，我曾怀疑自己是否活得下去。这件事或许是我一生中最困难的一项决定。婉达并不知道，我差点改变主意要她留下。可是为了基地的未来，婉达与史铁亭必须前往群星尽头。这是心理史学必然的选择，所以话说回来，这或许并不算是我的决定。
我仍旧每天来到这里，来到我在心理史学大楼中的研究室。这座建筑日夜忙碌的日子依然存在我记忆中，有时我仿佛依稀听见此起彼落的人声，发自那些久违的家人、学生与同事。 然而，事实上每间研究室都空荡寂静，只有我的轮椅发出的呼呼声回荡在走廊上。我想我应该撤出这座大楼，将它还给大学当局，供另一个系所使用。不过要舍弃这个地方实在很难，有那么多的回忆…… 现在我所拥有的，只剩下我的元光体。这是心理史学的计算工具，计划中的每条方程式都借此分析，一切都在这个不可思议的黑色小立方体中。此时我坐在这里，这个看似简单的工具就握在我的掌心。我好希望能将它的功用展示给机•丹尼尔•奥利瓦……
但我现在孤独一人。我只要按下开关，调暗研究室的照明，在我靠回轮椅时，元光体就激活了。那些方程式在我周围散开，形成三维光团，在一般人眼中，这个七彩漩涡只是一堆杂乱的图形与数字，但对我——还有雨果、婉达、盖尔——而言，这就是心理史学，活生生的心理史学。
人类的未来就展现在我的面前，潜在的三万年混沌混乱，已被压缩成短短一个千年……那块光度日增的，就是端点星方程式。而严重扭曲的那一块，则是川陀的图像，但在当中我仍能看见……是的，我看见一道柔和的光芒，稳定的希望之光……群星尽头！
这——就是我终身的志业。我的过去，人类的未来。基地！如此美丽、生动，没有其他可以比拟……
铎丝！
哈里•谢顿：……银纪一二〇六九年（基地元年），逝于川陀大学的研究室中，遗体仆倒在书桌上。显然谢顿生命中最后一刻，仍在从事心理史学方程式的研究；在他手中，还紧握着已激活的元光体……
根据谢顿的遗嘱，这个仪器后来送交他的同事盖尔•多尼克，后者在谢顿过世前不久移 居端点星……
谢顿的遗体被抛入太空，这也是遵照他遗嘱的指示。在川陀举行的官方追悼会相当简单， 出席者却出乎意料地踊跃。值得注意的是，谢顿的老友——前首相伊图•丹莫茨尔亦曾出席。克里昂大帝一世在位期间，丹莫茨尔在九九派阴谋平息后随即神秘失踪，从此再无人见过他。 谢顿的追悼会结束后，公共安全委员会曾试图追査丹莫茨尔的行踪，但努力多日仍一无所 获……
婉达•谢顿——哈里•谢顿的孙女——则未出席追悼仪式。传言她由于伤心欲绝，拒绝在任何公开场合露面。直到今天，她的下落仍是个谜…… 有人认为哈里•谢顿虽死犹生，因为他离世之际，他创造的未来正展现在他的四周……
—— 《银河百科全书》
