
Book
HAND-ON-THIGH STORY-- ... An occasion cited by Hari Seldon as the first turning point in his search for a method to develop psychohistory. Unfortunately, his published writings give no indication as to what that "story" was and speculations concerning it (there have been many) are futile. It remains one of the many intriguing mysteries concerning Seldons career.
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

Chapter 45

Raindrop Forty-Three stared at Seldon, wild-eyed and breathing heavily. "I cant stay here," she said.
Seldon looked about. "No one is bothering us. Even the Brother from whom we got the dainties said nothing about us. He seemed to take us as a perfectly normal pair."
"Thats because there is nothing unusual about us--when the light is dim, when you keep your voice low so the tribesman accent is less noticeable, and when I seem calm. But now--" Her voice was growing hoarse.
"What of now?"
"I am nervous and tense. I am ... in a perspiration."
"Who is to notice? Relax. Calm down."
"I cant relax here. I cant calm down while I may be noticed."
"Where are we to go, then?"
"There are little sheds for resting. I have worked here. I know about them."
She was walking rapidly now and Seldon followed. Up a small ramp, which he would not have noticed in the twilight without her, there was a line of doors, well spread apart.
"The one at the end," she muttered. "If its free."
It was unoccupied. A small glowing rectangle said NOT IN USE and the door was ajar.
Raindrop Forty-Three looked about rapidly, motioned Seldon in, then stepped inside herself. She closed the door and, as she did so, a small ceiling light brightened the interior.
Seldon said, "Is there any way the sign on the door can indicate this shed is in use?"
"That happened automatically when the door closed and the light went on," said the Sister.
Seldon could feel air softly circulating with a small sighing sound, but where on Trantor was that ever-present sound and feel not apparent? The room was not large, but it had a cot with a firm, efficient mattress, and what were obviously clean sheets. There was a chair and table, a small refrigerator, and something that looked like an enclosed hot plate, probably a tiny food-heater.
Raindrop Forty-Three sat down on the chair, sitting stiffly upright, visibly attempting to force herself into relaxation.
Seldon, uncertain as to what he ought to do, remained standing till she gestured--a bit impatiently--for him to sit on the cot. He did so.
Raindrop Forty-Three said softly, as though talking to herself, "If it is ever known that I have been here with a man--even if only a tribesman--I shall indeed be an outcast."
Seldon rose quickly. "Then lets not stay here."
"Sit down. I cant go out when Im in this mood. Youve been asking about religion. What are you after?"
It seemed to Seldon that she had changed completely. Gone was the passivity, the subservience. There was none of the shyness, the backwardness in the presence of a male. She was glaring at him through narrowed eyes.
"I told you. Knowledge. Im a scholar. It is my profession and my desire to know, I want to understand people in particular, so I want to learn history. For many worlds, the ancient historical records--the truly ancient historical records--have decayed into myths and legends, often becoming part of a set of religious beliefs or of supernaturalism. But if Mycogen does not have a religion, then--"
"I said we have history."
Seldon said, "Twice youve said you have history. How old?"
"It goes back twenty thousand years."
"Truly? Let us speak frankly. Is it real history or is it something that has degenerated into legend?"
"It is real history, of course."
Seldon was on the point of asking how she could tell, but thought better of it. Was there really a chance that history might reach back twenty thousand years and be authentic? He was not a historian himself, so he would have to check with Dors.
But it seemed so likely to him that on every world the earliest histories were medleys of self-serving heroisms and minidramas that were meant as morality plays and were not to be taken literally. It was surely true of Helicon, yet you would find scarcely a Heliconian who would not swear by all the tales told and insist it was all true history. They would support, as such, even that perfectly ridiculous tale of the first exploration of Helicon and the encounters with large and dangerous flying reptiles--even though nothing like flying reptiles had been found to be native to any world explored and settled by human beings.
He said instead, "How does this history begin?"
There was a faraway look in the Sisters eyes, a look that did not focus on Seldon or on anything in the room. She said, "It begins with a world--our world. One world."
"One world?" (Seldon remembered that Hummin had spoken of legends of a single, original world of humanity.)
"One world. There were others later, but ours was the first. One world, with space, with open air, with room for everyone, with fertile fields, with friendly homes, with warm people. For thousands of years we lived there and then we had to leave and skulk in one place or another until some of us found a corner of Trantor where we learned to grow food that brought us a little freedom. And here in Mycogen, we now have our own ways--and our own dreams."
"And your histories give the full details concerning the original world? The one world?"
"Oh yes, it is all in a book and we all have it. Every one of us. We carry it at all times so that there is never a moment when any one of us cannot open it and read it and remember who we are and who we were and resolve that someday we will have our world back."
"Do you know where this world is and who lives on it now?"
Raindrop Forty-Three hesitated, then shook her head fiercely. "We do not, but someday we will find it."
"And you have this book in your possession now?"
"Of course."
"May I see that book?"
Now a slow smile crossed the face of the Sister. She said, "So thats what you want. I knew you wanted something when you asked to be guided through the microfarms by me alone." She seemed a little embarrassed. "I didnt think it was the Book."
"It is all I want," said Seldon earnestly. "I really did not have my mind on anything else. If you brought me here because you thought--"
She did not allow him to finish. "But here we are. Do you or dont you want the Book?"
"Are you offering to let me see it?"
"On one condition."
Seldon paused, weighing the possibility of serious trouble if he had overcome the Sisters inhibitions to a greater extent than he had ever intended. "What condition?" he said.
Raindrop Forty-Threes tongue emerged lightly and licked quickly at her lips. Then she said with a distinct tremor in her voice, "That you remove your skincap."


Chapter 46

Hari Seldon stared blankly at Raindrop Forty-Three. There was a perceptible moment in which he did not know what she was talking about. He had forgotten he was wearing a skincap.
Then he put his hand to his head and, for the first time, consciously felt the skincap he was wearing. It was smooth, but he felt the tiny resilience of the hair beneath. Not much. His hair, after all, was fine and without much body. He said, still feeling it, "Why?"
She said, "Because I want you to. Because thats the condition if you want to see the Book."
He said, "Well, if you really want me to." His hand probed for the edge, so that he could peel it off.
But she said, "No, let me do it. Ill do it." She was looking at him hungrily.
Seldon dropped his hands to his lap. "Go ahead, then."
The Sister rose quickly and sat down next to him on the cot. Slowly, carefully, she detached the skincap from his head just in front of his ear. Again she licked her lips and she was panting as she loosened the skincap about his forehead and turned it up. Then it came away and was gone and Seldons hair, released, seemed to stir a bit in glad freedom.
He said, troubled, "Keeping my hair under the skincap has probably made my scalp sweat. If so, my hair will be rather damp."
He raised his hand, as though to check the matter, but she caught it and held it back. "I want to do that," she said. "Its part of the condition." Her fingers, slowly and hesitantly, touched his hair and then withdrew. She touched it again and, very gently, stroked it. "Its dry," she said. "It feels ... good."
"Have you ever felt cephalic hair before?"
"Only on children sometimes. This ... is different." She was stroking again.
"In what way?" Seldon, even amid his embarrassment, found it possible to be curious.
"I cant say. Its just ... different."
After a while he said, "Have you had enough?"
"No. Dont rush me. Can you make it lie anyway you want it to?"
"Not really. It has a natural way of falling, but I need a comb for that and I dont have one with me."
"A comb?"
"An object with prongs ... uh, like a fork ... but the prongs are more numerous and somewhat softer."
"Can you use your fingers?" She was running hers through his hair.
He said, "After a fashion. It doesnt work very well."
"Its bristly behind."
"The hair is shorter there."
Raindrop Forty-Three seemed to recall something. "The eyebrows," she said. "Isnt that what theyre called?" She stripped off the shields, then ran her fingers through the gentle arc of hair, against the grain. "Thats nice," she said, then laughed in a high-pitched way that was almost like her younger sisters giggle. "Theyre cute."
Seldon said a little impatiently, "Is there anything else thats part of the condition?"
In the rather dim light, Raindrop Forty-Three looked as though she might be considering an affirmative, but said nothing. Instead, she suddenly withdrew her hands and lifted them to her nose. Seldon wondered what she might be smelling. "How odd," she said. "May I ... may I do it again another time?"
Seldon said uneasily, "If you will let me have the Book long enough to study it, then perhaps."
Raindrop Forty-Three reached into her kirtle through a slit that Seldon had not noticed before and, from some hidden inner pocket, removed a book bound in some tough, flexible material. He took it, trying to control his excitement. While Seldon readjusted his skincap to cover his hair, Raindrop Forty-Three raised her hands to her nose again and then, gently and quickly, licked one finger.

Chapter 47

"Felt your hair?" said Dors Venabili. She looked at Seldons hair as though she was of a mind to feel it herself.
Seldon moved away slightly. "Please dont. The woman made it seem like a perversion."
"I suppose it was--from her standpoint. Did you derive no pleasure from it yourself?"
"Pleasure? It gave me gooseflesh. When she finally stopped, I was able to breathe again. I kept thinking: What other conditions will she make?"
Dors laughed. "Were you afraid that she would force sex upon you? Or hopeful?"
"I assure you I didnt dare think. I just wanted the Book."
They were in their room now and Dors turned on her field distorter to make sure they would not be overheard.
The Mycogenian night was about to begin. Seldon had removed his skincap and kirtle and had bathed, paying particular attention to his hair, which he had foamed and rinsed twice. He was now sitting on his cot, wearing a light nightgown that had been hanging in the closet.
Dors said, eyes dancing, "Did she know you have hair on your chest?"
"I was hoping earnestly she wouldnt think of that."
"Poor Hari. It was all perfectly natural, you know. I would probably have had similar trouble if I was alone with a Brother. Worse, Im sure, since he would believe--Mycogenian society being what it is--that as a woman I would be bound to obey his orders without delay or demur."
"No, Dors. You may think it was perfectly natural, but you didnt experience it. The poor woman was in a high state of sexual excitement. She engaged all her senses ... smelled her fingers, licked them. If she could have heard hair grow, she would have listened avidly."
"But thats what I mean by natural. Anything you make forbidden gains sexual attractiveness. Would you be particularly interested in womens breasts if you lived in a society in which they were displayed at all times?"
"I think I might."
"Wouldnt you be more interested if they were always hidden, as in most societies they are?-- Listen, let me tell you something that happened to me. I was at a lake resort back home on Cinna ... I presume you have resorts on Helicon, beaches, that sort of thing?"
"Of course," said Seldon, slightly annoyed. "What do you think Helicon is, a world of rocks and mountains, with only well water to drink?"
"No offense, Hari. I just want to make sure youll get the point of the story. On our beaches at Cinna, were pretty lighthearted about what we wear ... or dont wear."
"Nude beaches?"
"Not actually, though I suppose if someone removed all of his or her clothing it wouldnt be much remarked on. The custom is to wear a decent minimum, but I must admit that what we consider decent leaves very little to the imagination."
Seldon said, "We have somewhat higher standards of decency on Helicon."
"Yes, I could tell that by your careful treatment of me, but to each its own. In any case, I was sitting at the small beach by the lake and a young man approached to whom I had spoken earlier in the day. He was a decent fellow I found nothing particularly wrong with. He sat on the arm of my chair and placed his right hand on my left thigh, which was bare, of course, in order to steady himself.
"After we had spoken for a minute and a half or so, he said, impishly. Here I am. You know me hardly at all and yet it seems perfectly natural to me that I place my hand on your thigh. Whats more, it seems perfectly natural to you, since you dont seem to mind that it remains there.
"It was only then that I actually noticed that his hand was on my thigh. Bare skin in public somehow loses some of its sexual quality. As I said, its the hiding from view that is crucial.
"And the young man felt this too, for he went on to say, Yet if I were to meet you under more formal conditions and you were wearing a gown, you wouldnt dream of letting me lift your gown and place my hand on your thigh on the precise spot it now occupies.
"I laughed and we continued to talk of this and that. Of course, the young man, now that my attention had been called to the position of his hand, felt it no longer appropriate to keep it there and removed it.
"That night I dressed for dinner with more than usual care and appeared in clothing that was considerably more formal than was required or than other women in the dining room were wearing. I found the young man in question. He was sitting at one of the tables. I approached, greeted him, and said, Here I am in a gown, but under it my left thigh is bare. I give you permission. Just lift the gown and place your hand on my left thigh where you had it earlier.
"He tried. Ill give him credit for that, but everyone was staring. I wouldnt have stopped him and Im sure no one else would have stopped him either, but he couldnt bring himself to do it. It was no more public then than it had been earlier and the same people were present in both cases. It was clear that I had taken the initiative and that I had no objections, but he could not bring himself to violate the proprieties. The conditions, which had been hand-on-thigh in the afternoon, were not hand-on-thigh in the evening and that meant more than anything logic could say."
Seldon said, "I would have put my hand on your thigh."
"Are you sure?"
"Positive."
"Even though your standards of decency on the beach are higher than ours are?"
"Yes."
Dors sat down on her own cot, then lay down with her hands behind her head. "So that youre not particularly disturbed that Im wearing a nightgown with very little underneath it."
"Im not particularly shocked. As for being disturbed, that depends on the definition of the word. Im certainly aware of how youre dressed."
"Well, if were going to be cooped up here for a period of time, well have to learn to ignore such things."
"Or take advantage of them," said Seldon, grinning. "And I like your hair. After seeing you bald all day, I like your hair."
"Well, dont touch it. I havent washed it yet." She half-closed her eyes. "Its interesting. Youve detached the informal and formal level of respectability. What youre saying is that Helicon is more respectable at the informal level than Cinna is and less respectable at the formal level. Is that right?"
"Actually, Im just talking about the young man who placed his hand on your thigh and myself. How representative we are as Cinnians and Heliconians, respectively, I cant say. I can easily imagine some perfectly proper individuals on both worlds--and some madcaps too."
"Were talking about social pressures. Im not exactly a Galactic traveler, but Ive had to involve myself in a great deal of social history. On the planet of Derowd, there was a time when premarital sex was absolutely free. Multiple sex was allowed for the unmarried and public sex was frowned upon only when traffic was blocked: And yet, after marriage, monogamy was absolute and unbroken. The theory was that by working off all ones fantasies first, one could settle down to the serious business of life."
"Did it work?"
"About three hundred years ago that stopped, but some of my colleagues say it stopped through external pressure from other worlds who were losing too much tourist business to Derowd. There is such a thing as overall Galactic social pressure too."
"Or perhaps economic pressure, in this case."
"Perhaps. And being at the University, by the way, I get a chance to study social pressures, even without being a Galactic traveler. I meet people from scores of places inside and outside of Trantor and one of the pet amusements in the social science departments is the comparison of social pressures.
"Here in Mycogen, for instance, I have the impression that sex is strictly controlled and is permitted under only the most stringent rules, all the more tightly enforced because it is never discussed. In the Streeling Sector, sex is never discussed either, but it isnt condemned. In the Jennat Sector, where I spent a week once doing research, sex is discussed endlessly, but only for the purpose of condemning it. I dont suppose there are any two sectors in Trantor--or any two worlds outside Trantor--in which attitudes toward sex are completely duplicated."
Seldon said, "You know what you make it sound like? It would appear--"
Dors said, "Ill tell you how it appears. All this talk of sex makes one thing clear to me. Im simply not going to let you out of my sight anymore."
"What?"
"Twice I let you go, the first time through my own misjudgment and the second because you bullied me into it. Both times it was clearly a mistake. You know what happened to you the first time."
Seldon said indignantly, "Yes, but nothing happened to me the second time."
"You nearly got into a lot of trouble. Suppose you had been caught indulging in sexual escapades with a Sister?"
"It wasnt a sexual--"
"You yourself said she was in a high state of sexual excitement."
"But--"
"It was wrong. Please get it through your head, Hari. From now on, you go nowhere without me."
"Look," said Seldon freezingly, "my object was to find out about Mycogenian history and as a result of the so-called sexual escapade with a Sister, I have a book--the Book."
"The Book! True, theres the Book. Lets see it."
Seldon produced it and Dors thoughtfully hefted it.
She said, "It might not do us any good, Hari. This doesnt look as though it will fit any projector Ive ever encountered. That means youll have to get a Mycogenian projector and theyll want to know why you want it. Theyll then find out you have this Book and theyll take it away from you."
Seldon smiled. "If your assumptions were correct, Dors, your conclusions would be inescapable, but it happens that this is not the kind of book you think it is. Its not meant to be projected. The material is printed on various pages and the pages are turned. Raindrop Forty-Three explained that much to me."
"A print-book!" It was hard to tell whether Dors was shocked or amused. "Thats from the Stone Age."
"Its certainly pre-Empire," said Seldon, "but not entirely so. Have you ever seen a print-book?"
"Considering that Im a historian? Of course, Hari."
"Ah, but like this one?"
He handed over the Book and Dors, smiling, opened it--then turned to another page--then flipped the pages. "Its blank," she said.
"It appears to be blank. The Mycogenians are stubbornly primitivistic, but not entirely so. They will keep to the essence of the primitive, but have no objection to using modern technology to modify it for conveniences sake. Who knows?"
"Maybe so, Hari, but I dont understand what youre saying."
"The pages arent blank, theyre covered with microprint. Here, give it back. If I press this little nubbin on the inner edge of the cover-- Look!"
The page to which the book lay open was suddenly covered with lines of print that rolled slowly upward.
Seldon said, "You can adjust the rate of upward movement to match your reading speed by slightly twisting the nubbin one way or the other. When the lines of print reach their upward limit when you reach the bottom line, that is--they snap downward and turn off. You turn to the next page and continue."
"Where does the energy come from that does all this?"
"It has an enclosed microfusion battery that lasts the life of the book."
"Then when it runs down--"
"You discard the book, which you may be required to do even before it runs down, given wear and tear, and get another copy. You never replace the battery."
Dors took the Book a second time and looked at it from all sides. She said, "I must admit I never heard of a book like this."
"Nor I. The Galaxy, generally, has moved into visual technology so rapidly, it skipped over this possibility."
"This is visual."
"Yes, but not with the orthodox effects. This type of book has its advantages. It holds far more than an ordinary visual book does."
Dors said, "Wheres the turn-on?--Ah, let me see if I can work it." She had opened to a page at random and set the lines of print marching upward. Then she said, "Im afraid this wont do you any good, Hari. Its pre-Galactic. I dont mean the book. I mean the print ... the language."
"Can you read it, Dors? As a historian--"
"As a historian, Im used to dealing with archaic language--but within limits. This is far too ancient for me. I can make out a few words here and there, but not enough to be useful."
"Good," said Seldon. "If its really ancient, it will be useful."
"Not if you cant read it."
"I can read it," said Seldon. "Its bilingual. You dont suppose that Raindrop Forty-Three can read the ancient script, do you?"
"If shes educated properly, why not?"
"Because I suspect that women in Mycogen are not educated past household duties. Some of the more learned men can read this, but everyone else would need a translation to Galactic." He pushed another nubbin. "And this supplies it."
The lines of print changed to Galactic Standard.
"Delightful," said Dors in admiration.
"We could learn from these Mycogenians, but we dont."
"We havent known about it."
"I cant believe that. I know about it now. And you know about it. There must be outsiders coming into Mycogen now and then, for commercial or political reasons, or there wouldnt be skincaps so ready for use. So every once in a while someone must have caught a glimpse of this sort of print-book and seen how it works, but its probably dismissed as something curious but not worth further study, simply because its Mycogenian."
"But is it worth study?"
"Of course. Everything is. Or should be. Hummin would probably point to this lack of concern about these books as a sign of degeneration in the Empire." He lifted the Book and said with a gush of excitement, "But I am curious and I will read this and it may push me in the direction of psychohistory."
"I hope so," said Dors, "but if you take my advice, youll sleep first and approach it fresh in the morning. You wont learn much if you nod over it."
Seldon hesitated, then said, "How maternal you are!"
"Im watching over you."
"But I have a mother alive on Helicon. I would rather you were my friend."
"As for that, I have been your friend since first I met you." She smiled at him and Seldon hesitated as though he were not certain as to the appropriate rejoinder.
Finally he said, "Then Ill take your advice--as a friend--and sleep before reading."
He made as though to put the Book on a small table between the two cots, hesitated, turned, and put it under his pillow.
Dors Venabili laughed softly. "I think youre afraid I will wake during the night and read parts of the Book before you have a chance to. Is that it?"
"Well," said Seldon, trying not to look ashamed, "that may be it. Even friendship only goes so far and this is my book and its my psychohistory."
"I agree," said Dors, "and I promise you that we wont quarrel over that. By the way, you were about to say something earlier when I interrupted you. Remember?"
Seldon thought briefly. "No."
In the dark, he thought only of the Book. He gave no thought to the hand-on-thigh story. In fact, he had already quite forgotten it, consciously at least.


Chapter 48

Venabili woke up and could tell by her timeband that the night period was only half over. Not hearing Haris snore, she could tell that his cot was empty. If he had not left the apartment, then he was in the bathroom. She tapped lightly on the door and said softly, "Hari?"
He said, "Come in," in an abstracted way and she did. The toilet lid was down and Seldon, seated upon it, held the Book open on his lap. He said, quite unnecessarily, "Im reading."
"Yes, I see that. But why?"
"I couldnt sleep. Im sorry."
"But why read in here?"
"If I had turned on the room light, I would have woken you up."
"Are you sure the Book cant be illuminated?"
"Pretty sure. When Raindrop Forty-Three described its workings, she never mentioned illumination. Besides, I suppose that would use up so much energy that the battery wouldnt last the life of the Book." He sounded dissatisfied.
Dors said, "You can step out, then. I want to use this place, as long as Im here."
When she emerged, she found him sitting cross-legged on his cot, still reading, with the room well lighted.
She said, "You dont look happy. Does the Book disappoint you?"
He looked up at her, blinking. "Yes, it does. Ive sampled it here and there. Its all Ive had time to do. The thing is a virtual encyclopedia and the index is almost entirely a listing of people and places that are of little use for my purposes. It has nothing to do with the Galactic Empire or the pre-Imperial Kingdoms either. It deals almost entirely with a single world and, as nearly as I can make out from what I have read, it is an endless dissertation on internal politics."
"Perhaps you underestimate its age. It may deal with a period when there was indeed only one world ... one inhabited world."
"Yes, I know," said Seldon a little impatiently. "Thats actually what I want--provided I can be sure its history, not legend. I wonder. I dont want to believe it just because I want to believe it."
Dors said, "Well, this matter of a single-world origin is much in the air these days. Human beings are a single species spread all over the Galaxy, so they must have originated somewhere. At least thats the popular view at present. You cant have independent origins producing the same species on different worlds."
"But Ive never seen the inevitability of that argument," said Seldon. "If human beings arose on a number of worlds as a number of different species, why couldnt they have interbred into some single intermediate species?"
"Because species cant interbreed. Thats what makes them species."
Seldon thought about it a moment, then dismissed it with a shrug. "Well, Ill leave it to the biologists."
"Theyre precisely the ones who are keenest on the Earth hypothesis."
"Earth? Is that what they call the supposed world of origin?"
"Thats a popular name for it, though theres no way of telling what it was called, assuming there was one. And no one has any clue to what its location might be."
"Earth!" said Seldon, curling his lips. "It sounds like a belch to me. In any case, if the book deals with the original world, I didnt come across it. How do you spell the word?"
She told him and he checked the Book quickly. "There you are. The name is not listed in the index, either by that spelling or any reasonable alternative."
"Really?"
"And they do mention other worlds in passing. Names arent given and there seems no interest in those other worlds except insofar as they directly impinge on the local world they speak of ... at least as far as I can see from what Ive read. In one place, they talked about The Fifty. I dont know what they meant. Fifty leaders? Fifty cities? It seemed to me to be fifty worlds."
"Did they give a name to their own world, this world that seems to preoccupy them entirely?" asked Dors. "If they dont call it Earth, what do they call it?"
"As youd expect, they call it the world or the planet. Sometimes they call it the Oldest or the World of the Dawn, which has a poetic significance, I presume, that isnt clear to me. I suppose one ought to read the Book entirely through and some matters will then grow to make more sense." He looked down at the Book in his hand with some distaste. "It would take a very long time, though, and Im not sure that Id end up any the wiser."
Dors sighed. "Im sorry, Hari. You sound so disappointed."
"Thats because I am disappointed. Its my fault, though. I should not have allowed myself to expect too much.--At one point, come to think of it, they referred to their world as Aurora. "
"Aurora?" said Dors, lifting her eyebrows.
"It sounds like a proper name. It doesnt make any sense otherwise, as far as I can see. Does it mean anything to you, Dors?"
"Aurora." Dors thought about it with a slight frown on her face. "I cant say Ive ever heard of a planet with that name in the course of the history of the Galactic Empire or during the period of its growth, for that matter, but I wont pretend to know the name of every one of the twenty-five million worlds. We could look it up in the University library--if we ever get back to Streeling. Theres no use trying to find a library here in Mycogen. Somehow I have a feeling that all their knowledge is in the Book. If anything isnt there, they arent interested."
Seldon yawned and said, "I think youre right. In any case, theres no use reading any more and I doubt that I can keep my eyes open any longer. Is it all right if I put out the light?"
"I would welcome it, Hari. And lets sleep a little later in the morning."
Then, in the dark, Seldon said softly, "Of course, some of what they say is ridiculous. For instance, they refer to a life expectancy on their world of between three and four centuries."
"Centuries?"
"Yes, they count their ages by decades rather than by years. It gives you a queer feeling, because so much of what they say is perfectly matter-of-fact that when they come out with something that odd, you almost find yourself trapped into believing it."
"If you feel yourself beginning to believe that, then you should realize that many legends of primitive origins assume extended life spans for early leaders. If theyre pictured as unbelievably heroic, you see, it seems natural that they have life spans to suit."
"Is that so?" said Seldon, yawning again.
"It is. And the cure for advanced gullibility is to go to sleep and consider matters again the next day."
And Seldon, pausing only long enough to think that an extended life span might well be a simple necessity for anyone trying to understand a Galaxy of people, slept.


Chapter 49

The next morning, feeling relaxed and refreshed and eager to begin his study of the Book again, Hari asked Dors, "How old would you say the Raindrop sisters are?"
"I dont know. Twenty ... twenty-two?"
"Well, suppose they do live three or four centuries."
"Hari. Thats ridiculous."
"Im saying suppose. In mathematics, we say suppose all the time and see if we can end up with something patently untrue or self-contradictory. An extended life span would almost surely mean an extended period of development. They might seem in their early twenties and actually be in their sixties."
"You can try asking them how old they are."
"We can assume theyd lie."
"Look up their birth certificates."
Seldon smiled wryly. "Ill bet you anything you like--a roll in the hay, if youre willing--that theyll claim they dont keep records or that, if they do, they will insist those records are closed to tribespeople."
"No bet," said Dors. "And if thats true, then its useless trying to suppose anything about their age."
"Oh no. Think of it this way. If the Mycogenians are living extended life spans that are four or five times that of ordinary human beings, they cant very well give birth to very many children without expanding their population tremendously. You remember that Sunmaster said something about not having the population expand and bit off his remarks angrily at that time."
Dors said, "What are you getting at?"
"When I was with Raindrop Forty-Three, I saw no children."
"On the microfarms?"
"Yes."
"Did you expect children there? I was with Raindrop Forty-Five in the shops and on the residential levels and I assure you I saw a number of children of all ages, including infants. Quite a few of them."
"Ah." Seldon looked chagrined. "Then that would mean they cant be enjoying extended life spans."
Dors said, "By your line of argument, I should say definitely not. Did you really think they did?"
"No, not really. But then you cant close your mind either and make assumptions without testing them one way or another."
"You can waste a lot of time that way too, if you stop to chew away at things that are ridiculous on the face of it."
"Some things that seem ridiculous on the face of it arent. Thats all. Which reminds me. Youre the historian. In your work, have you ever come across objects or phenomena called robots?"
"Ah! Now youre switching to another legend and a very popular one. There are any number of worlds that imagine the existence of machines in human form in prehistoric times. These are called robots.
"The tales of robots probably originate from one master legend, for the general theme is the same. Robots were devised, then grew in numbers and abilities to the status of the almost superhuman. They threatened humanity and were destroyed. In every case, the destruction took place before the actual reliable historic records available to us today existed. The usual feeling is that the story is a symbolic picture of the risks and dangers of exploring the Galaxy, when human beings expanded outward from the world or worlds that were their original homes. There must always have been the fear of encountering other--and superior--intelligences."
"Perhaps they did at least once and that gave rise to the legend."
"Except that on no human--occupied world has there been any record or trace of any prehuman or nonhuman intelligence."
"But why robots? Does the word have meaning?"
"Not that I know of, but its the equivalent of the familiar automata. "
"Automata! Well, why dont they say so?"
"Because people do use archaic terms for flavor when they tell an ancient legend. Why do you ask all this, by the way?"
"Because in this ancient Mycogenian book, they talk of robots. And very favorably, by the way.--Listen, Dors, arent you going out with Raindrop Forty-Five again this afternoon?"
"Supposedly--if she shows up."
"Would you ask her some questions and try to get the answers out of her?"
"I can try. What are the questions?"
"I would like to find out, as tactfully as possible, if there is some structure in Mycogen that is particularly significant, that is tied in with the past, that has a sort of mythic value, that can--"
Dors interrupted, trying not to smile. "I think that what you are trying to ask is whether Mycogen has a temple."
And, inevitably, Seldon looked blank and said, "Whats a temple?"
"Another archaic term of uncertain origin. It means all the things you asked about--significance, past, myth. Very well, Ill ask. Its the sort of thing, however, that they might find difficult to speak of. To tribespeople, certainly."
"Nevertheless, do try."
Sacratorium
AURORA-- ... A mythical world, supposedly inhabited in primordial times, during the dawn of interstellar travel. It is thought by some to he the perhaps equally mythical "world of origin" of humanity and to be another name for "Earth." The people of the Mycogen (q.v.) Sector of ancient Trantor reportedly held themselves to be descended from the inhabitants of Aurora and made that tenet central to their system of beliefs, concerning which almost nothing else is known ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

Chapter 50

The two Raindrops arrived at midmorning. Raindrop Forty-Five seemed as  cheerful as ever, but Raindrop Forty-Three paused just inside the door,  looking drawn and circumspect. She kept her eyes down and did not as  much as glance at Seldon.
Seldon looked uncertain and gestured to Dors, who said in a cheerful  businesslike tone of voice, "One moment, Sisters. I must give  instructions to my man or he wont know what to do with himself today."
They moved into the bathroom and Dors whispered, "Is something wrong?"
"Yes. Raindrop Forty-Three is obviously shattered. Please tell her that I will return the Book as soon as possible."
Dors favored Seldon with a long surprised look. "Hari," she said, "youre  a sweet, caring person, but you havent the good sense of an amoeba. If I  as much as mention the Book to the poor woman, shell be certain that  you told me all about what happened yesterday and then shell really be  shattered. The only hope is to treat her exactly as I would ordinarily."
Seldon nodded his head and said dispiritedly, "I suppose youre right."

Dors returned in time for dinner and found Seldon on his cot, still  leafing through the Book, but with intensified impatience. He looked up  with a scowl and said, "If were going to be staying here any length of  time, were going to need a communication device of some sort between us.  I had no idea when youd get back and I was a little concerned."
"Well, here I am," she said, removing her skincap gingerly and looking  at it with more than a little distaste. "Im really pleased at your  concern. I rather thought youd be so lost in the Book, you wouldnt even  realize I was gone."
Seldon snorted.
Dors said, "As for communications devices, I doubt that they are easy to  come by in Mycogen. It would mean easing communication with  tribespeople outside and I suspect the leaders of Mycogen are bound and  determined to cut down on any possible interaction with the great  beyond."
"Yes," said Seldon, tossing the Book to one side, "I would expect that  from what I see in the Book. Did you find out about the whatever you  called it ... the temple?"
"Yes," she said, removing her eyebrow patches. "It exists. There are a  number of them over the area of the sector, but theres a central  building that seems to be the important one.--Would you believe that one  woman noticed my eyelashes and told me that I shouldnt let myself be  seen in public? I have a feeling she intended to report me for indecent  exposure."
"Never mind that," said Seldon impatiently. "Do you know where the central temple is located?"
"I have directions, but Raindrop Forty-Five warned me that women were  not allowed inside except on special occasions, none of which are coming  up soon. Its called the Sacratorium."
"The what."
"The Sacratorium."
"What an ugly word. What does it mean?"
Dors shook her head. "Its new to me. And neither Raindrop knew what it  meant either. To them, Sacratorium isnt what the building is called, its  what it is. Asking them why they called it that probably sounded like  asking them why a wall is called a wall."
"Is there anything about it they do know?"
"Of course, Hari. They know what its for. Its a place thats devoted to  something other than the life here in Mycogen. Its devoted to another  world, a former and better one."
"The world they once lived on, you mean?"
"Exactly. Raindrop Forty-Five all but said so, but not quite. She couldnt bring herself to say the word."
"Aurora?"
"Thats the word, but I suspect that if you were to say it out loud to a  group of Mycogenians, they would be shocked and horrified. Raindrop  Forty-Five, when she said, The Sacratorium is dedicated to--, stopped at  that point and carefully wrote out the letters one by one with her  finger on the palm of her hand. And she blushed, as though she was doing  something obscene."
"Strange," said Seldon. "If the Book is an accurate guide, Aurora is  their dearest memory, their chief point of unification, the center about  which everything in Mycogen revolves. Why should its mention be  considered obscene? Are you sure you didnt misinterpret what the Sister  meant?"
"Im positive. And perhaps its no mystery. Too much talk about it would  get to tribespeople. The best way of keeping it secret unto themselves  is to make its very mention taboo."
"Taboo?"
"A specialized anthropological term. Its a reference to serious and  effective social pressure forbidding some sort of action. The fact that  women are not allowed in the Sacratorium probably has the force of a  taboo. Im sure that a Sister would be horrified if it was suggested that  she invade its precincts."
"Are the directions you have good enough for me to get to the Sacratorium on my own?"
"In the first place, Hari, youre not going alone. Im going with you. I  thought we had discussed the matter and that I had made it clear that I  cannot protect you at long distance--not from sleet storms and not from  feral women. In the second place, its impractical to think of walking  there. Mycogen may be a small sector, as sectors go, but it simply isnt  that small."
"An Expressway, then."
"There are no Expressways passing through Mycogenian territory. It would  make contact between Mycogenians and tribespeople too easy. Still,  there are public conveyances of the kind that are found on less  developed planets. In fact, thats what Mycogen is, a piece of an  undeveloped planet, embedded like a splinter in the body of Trantor,  which is otherwise a patchwork of developed societies.--And Hari, finish  with the Book as soon as possible. Its apparent that Rainbow  Forty-Three is in trouble as long as you have it and so will we be if  they find out."
"Do you mean a tribesperson reading it is taboo?"
"Im sure of it."
"Well, it would be no great loss to give it back. I should say that 95  percent of it is incredibly dull; endless in-fighting among political  groups, endless justification of policies whose wisdom I cannot possibly  judge, endless homilies on ethical matters which, even when  enlightened, and they usually arent, are couched with such infuriating  self-righteousness as to almost enforce violation."
"You sound as though I would be doing you a great favor if I took the thing away from you."
"Except that theres always the other 5 percent that discusses the  never-to-be-mentioned Aurora. I keep thinking that there may be  something there and that it may be helpful to me. Thats why I wanted to  know about the Sacratorium.
"Do you hope to find support for the Books concept of Aurora in the Sacratorium?"
"In a way. And Im also terribly caught up in what the Book has to say  about automata, or robots, to use their term. I find myself attracted to  the concept."
"Surely, you dont take it seriously?"
"Almost. If you accept some passages of the Book literally, then there is an implication that some robots were in human shape."
"Naturally. If youre going to construct a simulacrum of a human being, you will make it look like a human being."
"Yes, simulacrum means likeness, but a likeness can be crude indeed. An  artist can draw a stick figure and you might know he is representing a  human being and recognize it. A circle for the head, a stalk for the  body, and four bent lines for arms and legs and you have it. But I mean  robots that really look like a human being, in every detail."
"Ridiculous, Hari. Imagine the time it would take to fashion the metal  of the body into perfect proportions, with the smooth curve of  underlying muscles."
"Who said metal, Dors? The impression I got is that such robots were  organic or pseudo-organic, that they were covered with skin, that you  could not easily draw a distinction between them and human beings in any  way."
"Does the Book say that?"
"Not in so many words. The inference, however--"
"Is your inference, Hari. You cant take it seriously."
"Let me try. I find four things that I can deduce from what the Book  says about robots--and I followed up every reference the index gave.  First, as I say, they--or some of them--exactly resembled human beings;  second, they had very extended life spans--if you want to call it that."
"Better say effectiveness, " said Dors, "or youll begin thinking of them as human altogether."
"Third," said Seldon, ignoring her, "that some--or, at any rate, at least one--continues to live on to this day."
"Hari, thats one of the most widespread legends we have. The ancient  hero does not die but remains in suspended animation, ready to return to  save his people at some time of great need. Really, Hari."
"Fourth," said Seldon, still not rising to the bait, "there are some  lines that seem to indicate that the central temple--or the Sacratorium,  if thats what it is, though I havent found that word in the Book,  actually--contains a robot." He paused, then said, "Do you see?"
Dors said, "No. What should I see?"
"If we combine the four points, perhaps a robot that looks exactly like a  human being and that is still alive, having been alive for, say, the  last twenty thousand years, is in the Sacratorium."
"Come on, Hari, you cant believe that."
"I dont actually believe it, but I cant entirely let go either. What if  its true? What if--its only one chance out of a million, I admit--its  true? Dont you see how useful he could be to me? He could remember the  Galaxy as it was long before any reliable historical records existed. He  might help make psychohistory possible."
"Even if it was true, do you suppose the Mycogenians would let you see and interview the robot?"
"I dont intend to ask permission. I can at least go to the Sacratorium and see if theres something to interview first."
"Not now. Tomorrow at the earliest. And if you dont think better of it by morning, we go."
"You told me yourself they dont allow women--"
"They allow women to look at it from outside, Im sure, and I suspect that is all well get to do."
And there she was adamant.
Hari Seldon was perfectly willing to let Dors take the lead. She had  been out in the main roadways of Mycogen and was more at home with them  than he was. Dors Venabili, brows knitted, was less delighted with the  prospect. She said, "We can easily get lost, you know."
"Not with that booklet," said Seldon.
She looked up at him impatiently. "Fix your mind on Mycogen, Hari. What I  should have is a computomap, something I can ask questions of. This  Mycogenian version is just a piece of folded plastic. I cant tell this  thing where I am. I cant tell it by word of mouth and I cant even tell  it by pushing the necessary contacts. It cant tell me anything either  way. Its a print thing."
"Then read what it says."
"Thats what Im trying to do, but its written for people who are familiar with the system to begin with. Well have to ask."
"No, Dors. That would be a last resort. I dont want to attract  attention. I would rather we take our chances and try to find our own  way, even if it means making one or two wrong turns."
Dors leafed through the booklet with great attention and then said  grudgingly, "Well, it gives the Sacratorium important mention. I suppose  thats only natural. I presume everyone in Mycogen would want to get  there at one time or another." Then, after additional concentration, she  said, "Ill tell you what. Theres no way of taking a conveyance from  here to there."
"What?"
"Dont get excited. Apparently, theres a way of getting from here to  another conveyance that will take us there. Well have to change from one  to another."
Seldon relaxed. "Well, of course. You cant take an Expressway to half the places on Trantor without changing."
Dors cast an impatient glance at Seldon. "I know that too. Its just that  Im used to having these things tell me so. When they expect you to find  out for yourself, the simplest things can escape you for a while."
"All right, dear. Dont snap. If you know the way now, lead. I will follow humbly."
And follow her he did, until they came to an intersection, where they  stopped. Three white-kirtled males and a pair of gray-kirtled females  were at the same intersection. Seldon tried a universal and general  smile in their direction, but they responded with a blank stare and  looked away. And then the conveyance came. It was an outmoded version of  what Seldon, back on Helicon, would have called a gravi-bus. There were  some twenty upholstered benches inside, each capable of holding four  people. Each bench had its own doors on both sides of the bus. When it  stopped, passengers emerged on either side. (For a moment, Seldon was  concerned for those who got out on the traffic side of the gravi-bus,  but then he noticed that every vehicle approaching from either direction  stopped as it neared the bus. None passed it while it was not moving.)
Dors pushed Seldon impatiently and he moved on to a bench where two  adjoining seats were available. Dors followed after. (The men always got  on and got off first, he noticed.)

Chapter 51
"For instance," she said and pointed to a smooth boxed-off area on the back of the bench directly before each of them. As soon as the conveyance had begun to move, words lit up, naming the next stop and the notable structures or crossways that were nearby.
"Now, that will probably tell us when were approaching the changeover we want. At least the sector isnt completely barbaric."
"Good," said Seldon. Then, after a while, leaning toward Dors, he whispered, "No one is looking at us. It seems that artificial boundaries are set up to preserve individual privacy in any crowded place. Have you noticed that?"
"Ive always taken it for granted. If thats going to be a rule of your psychohistory, no one will be very impressed by it."
As Dors had guessed, the direction plaque in front of them eventually announced the approach to the changeover for the direct line to the Sacratorium. They exited and again had to wait. Some buses ahead had already left this intersection, but another gravi-bus was already approaching. They were on a well-traveled route, which was not surprising; the Sacratorium was bound to be the center and heartbeat of the sector.
They got on the gravi-bus and Seldon whispered, "Were not paying."
"According to the map, public transportation is a free service."
Seldon thrust out his lower lip. "How civilized. I suppose that nothing is all of a piece, not backwardness, not barbarism, nothing."
But Dors nudged him and whispered, "Your rule is broken. Were being watched. The man on your right."


Chapter 52

Seldons eyes shifted briefly. The man to his right was rather thin and seemed quite old. He had dark brown eyes and a swarthy complexion, and Seldon was sure that he would have had black hair if he had not been depilated. He faced front again, thinking. This Brother was rather atypical. The few Brothers he had paid any attention to had been rather tall, light-skinned, and with blue or gray eyes. Of course, he had not seen enough of them to make a general rule.
Then there was a light touch on the right sleeve of his kirtle. Seldon turned hesitantly and found himself looking at a card on which was written lightly, CAREFUL, TRIBESMAN!
Seldon started and put a hand to his skincap automatically. The man next to him silently mouthed, "Hair."
Seldons hand found it, a tiny exposure of bristles at his temple. He must have disturbed the skincap at some point or another. Quickly and as unobtrusively as possible, he tugged the skincap, then made sure that it was snug under the pretence of stroking his head.
He turned to his neighbor on his right, nodded slightly, and mouthed, "Thank you."
His neighbor smiled and said in a normal speaking voice, "Going to the Sacratorium?"
Seldon nodded. "Yes, I am."
"Easy guess. So am I. Shall we get off together?" His smile was friendly.
"Im with my--my--"
"With your woman. Of course. All three together, then?"
Seldon was not sure how to react. A quick look in the other direction showed him that Dorss eyes were turned straight ahead. She was showing no interest in masculine conversation--an attitude appropriate for a Sister. However, Seldon felt a soft pat on his left knee, which he took (with perhaps little justification) to mean: "Its all right."
In any case, his natural sense of courtesy was on that side and he said, "Yes, certainly."
There was no further conversation until the direction plaque told them they were arriving at the Sacratorium and Seldons Mycogenian friend was rising to get off.
The gravi-bus made a wide turn about the perimeter of a large area of the Sacratorium grounds and there was a general exodus when it came to a halt, the men sliding in front of the women to exit first. The women followed.
The Mycogenians voice crackled a bit with age, but it was cheerful. He said, "Its a little early for lunch my ... friends, but take my word for it that things will be crowded in not too long a time. Would you be willing to buy something simple now and eat it outside? I am very familiar with this area and I know a good place."
Seldon wondered if this was a device to maneuver innocent tribespeople into something or other disreputable or costly, yet decided to chance it. "Youre very kind," he said. "Since we are not at all familiar with the place, we will be glad to let you take the lead."
They bought lunch--sandwiches and a beverage that looked like milk--at an open-air stand. Since it was a beautiful day and they were visitors, the old Mycogenian said, they would go to the Sacratorium grounds and eat out of doors, the better to become acquainted with their surroundings.
During their walk, carrying their lunch, Seldon noted that, on a very small scale, the Sacratorium resembled the Imperial Palace and that the grounds around it resembled, on a minute scale, the Imperial grounds. He could scarcely believe that the Mycogenian people admired the Imperial institution or, indeed, did anything but hate and despise it, yet the cultural attraction was apparently not to be withstood.
"Its beautiful," said the Mycogenian with obvious pride.
"Quite," said Seldon. "How it glistens in the daylight."
"The grounds around it," he said, "are constructed in imitation of the government grounds on our Dawn World ... in miniature, to be sure."
"Did you ever see the grounds of the Imperial Palace?" asked Seldon cautiously.
The Mycogenian caught the implication and seemed in no way put out by it. "They copied the Dawn World as best they could too."
Seldon doubted that in the extreme, but he said nothing. They came to a semicircular seat of white stonite, sparkling in the light as the Sacratorium did.
"Good," said the Mycogenian, his dark eyes gleaming with pleasure. "No ones taken my place. I call it mine only because its my favorite seat. It affords a beautiful view of the side wall of the Sacratorium past the trees. Please sit down. Its not cold, I assure you. And your companion. She is welcome to sit too. She is a tribeswoman, I know, and has different customs. She ... she may speak if she wishes."
Dors gave him a hard look and sat down.
Seldon, recognizing the fact that they might remain with this old Mycogenian a while, thrust out his hand and said, "I am Hari and my female companion is Dors. We dont use numbers, Im afraid."
"To each his ... or her ... own," said the other expansively. "I am Mycelium Seventy-Two. We are a large cohort."
"Mycelium?" said Seldon a bit hesitantly.
"You seem surprised," said Mycelium. "I take it, then, youve only met members of our Elder families. Names like Cloud and Sunshine and Starlight--all astronomical."
"I must admit--" began Seldon.
"Well, meet one of the lower classes. We take our names from the ground and from the micro-organisms we grow. Perfectly respectable."
"Im quite certain," said Seldon, "and thank you again for helping me with my ... problem in the gravi-bus."
"Listen," said Mycelium Seventy-Two, "I saved you a lot of trouble. If a Sister had seen you before I did, she would undoubtedly have screamed and the nearest Brothers would have bustled you off the bus--maybe not even waiting for it to stop moving."
Dors leaned forward so as to see across Seldon. "How is it you did not act in this way yourself?"
"I? I have no animosity against tribespeople. Im a scholar."
"A scholar?"
"First one in my cohort. I studied at the Sacratorium School and did very well. Im learned in all the ancient arts and I have a license to enter the tribal library, where they keep book-films and books by tribespeople. I can view any book-film or read any book I wish to. We even have a computerized reference library and I can handle that too. That sort of thing broadens your mind. I dont mind a little hair showing. Ive seen pictures of men with hair many a time. And women too." He glanced quickly at Dors.
They ate in silence for a while and then Seldon said, "I notice that every Brother who enters or leaves the Sacratorium is wearing a red sash."
"Oh yes," said Mycelium Seventy-Two. "Over the left shoulder and around the right side of the waist--usually very fancily embroidered."
"Why is that?"
"Its called an obiah. It symbolizes the joy felt at entering the Sacratorium and the blood one would spill to preserve it."
"Blood?" said Dors, frowning.
"Just a symbol. I never actually heard of anyone spilling blood over the Sacratorium. For that matter, there isnt that much joy. its mostly wailing and mourning and prostrating ones self over the Lost World." His voice dropped and became soft. "Very silly."
Dors said, "Youre not a ... a believer?"
"Im a scholar," said Mycelium with obvious pride. His face wrinkled as he grinned and took on an even more pronounced appearance of age.
Seldon found himself wondering how old the man was. Several centuries?--No, theyd disposed of that. It couldnt be and yet, "How old are you?" Seldon asked suddenly, involuntarily.
Mycelium Seventy-Two showed no signs of taking offense at the question, nor did he display any hesitation at answering, "Sixty-seven."
Seldon had to know. "I was told that your people believe that in very early times everyone lived for several centuries."
Mycelium Seventy-Two looked at Seldon quizzically. "Now how did you find that out? Someone must have been talking out of turn ... but its true. There is that belief. Only the unsophisticated believe it, but the Elders encourage it because it shows our superiority. Actually, our life expectancy is higher than elsewhere because we eat more nutritionally, but living even one century is rare."
"I take it you dont consider Mycogenians superior," said Seldon.
Mycelium Seventy-Two said, "Theres nothing wrong with Mycogenians. Theyre certainly not inferior. Still, I think that all men are equal.--Even women," he added, looking across at Dors.
"I dont suppose," said Seldon, "that many of your people would agree with that."
"Or many of your people," said Mycelium Seventy-Two with a faint resentment. "I believe it, though. A scholar has to. Ive viewed and even read all the great literature of the tribespeople. I understand your culture. Ive written articles on it. I can sit here just as comfortably with you as though you were ... [tit]."
Dors said a little sharply, "You sound proud of understanding tribespeoples ways. Have you ever traveled outside Mycogen?"
Mycelium Seventy-Two seemed to move away a little. "No."
"Why not? You would get to know us better."
"I wouldnt feel right. Id have to wear a wig. Id be ashamed."
Dors said, "Why a wig? You could stay bald."
"No," said Mycelium Seventy-Two, "I wouldnt be that kind of fool. Id be mistreated by all the hairy ones."
"Mistreated? Why?" said Dors. "We have a great many naturally bald people everywhere on Trantor and on every other world too."
"My father is quite bald," said Seldon with a sigh, "and I presume that in the decades to come I will be bald too. My hair isnt all that thick now."
"Thats not bald," said Mycelium Seventy-Two. "You keep hair around the edges and over your eyes. I mean bald--no hair at all."
"Anywhere on your body?" said Dors, interested.
And now Mycelium Seventy-Two looked offended and said nothing.
Seldon, anxious to get the conversation back on track, said, "Tell me, Mycelium Seventy-Two, can tribespeople enter the Sacratorium as spectators?"
Mycelium Seventy-Two shook his head vigorously. "Never. Its for the Sons of the Dawn only."
Dors said, "Only the Sons?"
Mycelium Seventy-Two looked shocked for a moment, then said forgivingly, "Well, youre tribespeople. Daughters of the Dawn enter only on certain days and times. Thats just the way it is. I dont say I approve. If it was up to me, Id say, Go in. Enjoy if you can. Sooner others than me, in fact."
"Dont you ever go in?"
"When I was young, my parents took me, but--he shook his head--"it was just people staring at the Book and reading from it and sighing and weeping for the old days. Its very depressing. You cant talk to each other. You cant laugh. You cant even look at each other. Your mind has to be totally on the Lost World. Totally." He waved a hand in rejection. "Not for me. Im a scholar and I want the whole world open to me."
"Good," said Seldon, seeing an opening. "We feel that way too. We are scholars also, Dors and myself."
"I know," said Mycelium Seventy-Two.
"You know? How do you know?"
"Youd have to be. The only tribespeople allowed in Mycogen are Imperial officials and diplomats, important traders, and scholars--and to me you have the look of scholars. Thats what interested me in you. Scholars together." He smiled delightedly.
"So we are. I am a mathematician. Dors is a historian. And you?"
"I specialize in ... culture. Ive read all the great works of literature of the tribespeople: Lissauer, Mentone, Novigor--"
"And we have read the great works of your people. Ive read the Book, for instance.--About the Lost World."
Mycelium Seventy-Twos eyes opened wide in surprise. His olive complexion seemed to fade a little. "You have? How? Where?"
"At our University we have copies that we can read if we have permission."
"Copies of the Book?"
"Yes."
"I wonder if the Elders know this?"
Seldon said, "And Ive read about robots."
"Robots?"
"Yes. That is why I would like to be able to enter the Sacratorium. I would like to see the robot." (Dors kicked lightly at Seldons ankle, but he ignored her.)
Mycelium Seventy-Two said uneasily, "I dont believe in such things. Scholarly people dont." But he looked about as though he was afraid of being overheard.
Seldon said, "Ive read that a robot still exists in the Sacratorium."
Mycelium Seventy-Two said, "I dont want to talk about such nonsense."
Seldon persisted. "Where would it be if it was in the Sacratorium?"
"Even if one was there, I couldnt tell you. I havent been in there since I was a child."
"Would you know if there was a special place, a hidden place?"
"Theres the Elders aerie. Only Elders go there, but theres nothing there."
"Have you ever been there?"
"No, of course not."
"Then how do you know?"
"I dont know that theres no pomegranate tree there. I dont know that theres no laser-organ there. I dont know that theres no item of a million different kinds there. Does my lack of knowledge of their absence show they are all present?"
For the moment, Seldon had nothing to say.
A ghost of a smile broke through Mycelium Seventy-Twos look of concern. He said, "Thats scholars reasoning. Im not an easy man to tackle, you see. Just the same, I wouldnt advise you to try to get up into the Elders aerie. I dont think youd like what would happen if they found a tribesman inside.--Well. Best of the Dawn to you." And he rose suddenly--without warning--and hurried away.
Seldon looked after him, rather surprised. "What made him rush off like that?"
"I think," said Dors, "its because someone is approaching."
And someone was. A tall man in an elaborate white kirtle, crossed by an even more elaborate and subtly glittering red sash, glided solemnly toward them. He had the unmistakable look of a man with authority and the even more unmistakable look of one who is not pleased.
apter 53

Hari Seldon rose as the new Mycogenian approached. He hadnt the slightest idea whether that was the appropriate polite behavior, but he had the distinct feeling it would do no harm. Dors Venabili rose with him and carefully kept her eyes lowered.
The other stood before them. He too was an old man, but more subtly aged than Mycelium Seventy-Two. Age seemed to lend distinction to his still-handsome face. His bald head was beautifully round and his eyes were a startling blue, contrasting sharply with the bright all-but-glowing red of his sash.
The newcomer said, "I see you are tribespeople." His voice was more high-pitched than Seldon had expected, but he spoke slowly, as though conscious of the weight of authority in every word he uttered.
"So we are," said Seldon politely but firmly. He saw no reason not to defer to the others position, but he did not intend to abandon his own.
"Your names?"
"I am Hari Seldon of Helicon. My companion is Dors Venabili of Cinna. And yours, man of Mycogen?"
The eyes narrowed in displeasure, but he too could recognize an air of authority when he felt it.
"I am Skystrip Two," he said, lifting his head higher, "an Elder of the Sacratorium. And your position, tribesman?"
"We," said Seldon, emphasizing the pronoun, "are scholars of Streeling University. I am a mathematician and my companion is a historian and we are here to study the ways of Mycogen."
"By whose authority?"
"By that of Sunmaster Fourteen, who greeted us on our arrival."
Skystrip Two fell silent for a moment and then a small smile appeared on his face and he took on an air that was almost benign. He said, "The High Elder. I know him well."
"And so you should," said Seldon blandly. "Is there anything else, Elder?"
"Yes." The Elder strove to regain the high ground. "Who was the man who was with you and who hurried away when I approached?"
Seldon shook his head, "We never saw him before, Elder, and know nothing about him. We encountered him purely by accident and asked about the Sacratorium."
"What did you ask him?"
"Two questions, Elder. We asked if that building was the Sacratorium and if tribespeople were allowed to enter it. He answered in the affirmative to the first question and in the negative to the second."
"Quite so. And what is your interest in the Sacratorium?"
"Sir, we are here to study the ways of Mycogen and is not the Sacratorium the heart and brain of Mycogen?"
"It is entirely ours and reserved for us."
"Even if an Elder--the High Elder--would arrange for permission in view of our scholarly function?"
"Have you indeed the High Elders permission?"
Seldon hesitated the slightest moment while Dorss eyes lifted briefly to look at him sideways. He decided he could not carry off a lie of this magnitude. "No," he said, "not yet."
"Or ever," said the Elder. "You are here in Mycogen by authority, but even the highest authority cannot exert total control over the public. We value our Sacratorium and the populace can easily grow excited over the presence of a tribesperson anywhere in Mycogen but, most particularly, in the vicinity of the Sacratorium. It would take one excitable person to raise a cry of Invasion! and a peaceful crowd such as this one would be turned into one that would be thirsting to tear you apart. I mean that quite literally. For your own good, even if the High Elder has shown you kindness, leave. Now!"
"But the Sacratorium--" said Seldon stubbornly, though Dors was pulling gently at his kirtle.
"What is there in the Sacratorium that can possibly interest you?" said the Elder. "You see it now. There is nothing for you to see in the interior."
"There is the robot," said Seldon.
The Elder stared at Seldon in shocked surprise and then, bending to bring his lips close to Seldons ear, whispered harshly, "Leave now or I will raise the cry of Invasion! myself. Nor, were it not for the High Elder, would I give you even this one chance to leave."
And Dors, with surprising strength, nearly pulled Seldon off his feet as she stepped hastily away, dragging him along until he caught his balance and stepped quickly after her.


Chapter 54
It was over breakfast the next morning, not sooner, that Dors took up the subject--and in a way that Seldon found most wounding. She said, "Well, that was a pretty fiasco yesterday."
Seldon, who had honestly thought he had gotten away with it without comment, looked sullen. "What made it a fiasco?"
"Driven out is what we were. And for what? What did we gain?"
"Only the knowledge that there is a robot in there."
"Mycelium Seventy-Two said there wasnt."
"Of course he said that. Hes a scholar--or thinks he is--and what he doesnt know about the Sacratorium would probably fill that library he goes to. You saw the Elders reaction."
"I certainly did."
"He would not have reacted like that if there was no robot inside. He was horrified we knew."
"Thats just your guess, Hari. And even if there was, we couldnt get in."
"We could certainly try. After breakfast, we go out and buy a sash for me, one of those obiahs. I put it on, keep my eyes devoutly downward, and walk right in."
"Skincap and all? Theyll spot you in a microsecond."
"No, they wont. Well go into the library where all the tribespeople data is kept. Id like to see it anyway. From the library, which is a Sacratorium annex, I gather, there will probably be an entrance into the Sacratorium."
"Where you will be picked up at once."
"Not at all. You heard what Mycelium Seventy-Two had to say. Everyone keeps his eyes down and meditates on their great Lost World, Aurora. No one looks at anyone else. It would probably be a grievous breach of discipline to do so. Then Ill find the Elders aerie--"
"Just like that?"
"At one point, Mycelium Seventy-Two said he would advise me not to try to get up into the Elders aerie. Up. It must be somewhere in that tower of the Sacratorium, the central tower."
Dors shook her head. "I dont recall the mans exact words and I dont think you do either. Thats a terribly weak foundation to-- Wait." She stopped suddenly and frowned.
"Well?" said Seldon.
"There is an archaic word aerie that means a dwelling place on high. "
"Ah! There you are. You see, weve learned some vital things as the result of what you call a fiasco. And if I can find a living robot thats twenty thousand years old and if it can tell me--"
"Suppose that such a thing exists, which passes belief, and that you find it, which is not very likely, how long do you think you will be able to talk to it before your presence is discovered?"
"I dont know, but if I can prove it exists and if I can find it, then Ill think of some way to talk to it. Its too late for me to back out now under any circumstances. Hummin should have left me alone when I thought there was no way of achieving psychohistory. Now that it seems there may be, I wont let anything stop me--short of being killed."
"The Mycogenians may oblige, Hari, and you cant run that risk."
"Yes, I can. Im going to try."
"No, Hari. I must look after you and I cant let you."
"You must let me. Finding a way to work out psychohistory is more important than my safety. My safety is only important because I may work out psychohistory. Prevent me from doing so and your task loses its meaning.--Think about it."
Hari felt himself infused with a renewed sense of purpose. Psychohistory--his nebulous theory that he had, such a short while ago, despaired ever of proving--loomed larger, more real. Now he had to believe that it was possible; he could feel it in his gut. The pieces seemed to be falling together and although he couldnt see the whole pattern yet, he was sure the Sacratorium would yield another piece to the puzzle.
"Then Ill go in with you so I can pull you out, you idiot, when the time comes."
"Women cant enter."
"What makes me a woman? Only this gray kirtle. You cant see my breasts under it. I dont have a womans style hairdo with the skincap on. I have the same washed, unmarked face a man has. The men here dont have stubble. All I need is a white kirtle and a sash and I can enter. Any Sister could do it if she wasnt held back by a taboo. I am not held back by one."
"Youre held back by me. I wont let you. Its too dangerous."
"No more dangerous for me than for you."
"But I must take the risk."
"Then so must I. Why is your imperative greater than mine?"
"Because--" Seldon paused in thought.
"Just tell yourself this," said Dors, her voice hard as rock. "I wont let you go there without me. If you try, I will knock you unconscious and tie you up. If you dont like that, then give up any thought of going alone."
Seldon hesitated and muttered darkly. He gave up the argument, at least for now.

Chapter 55
The sky was almost cloudless, but it was a pale blue, as though wrapped in a high thin mist. That, thought Seldon, was a good touch, but suddenly he missed the sun itself. No one on Trantor saw the planets sun unless he or she went Upperside and even then only when the natural cloud layer broke. Did native Trantorians miss the sun? Did they give it any thought? When one of them visited another world where a natural sun was in view, did he or she stare, half-blinded, at it with awe?
Why, he wondered, did so many people spend their lives not trying to find answers to questions--not even thinking of questions to begin with? Was there anything more exciting in life than seeking answers?
His glance shifted to ground level. The wide roadway was lined with low buildings, most of them shops. Numerous individual ground-cars moved in both directions, each hugging the right side. They seemed like a collection of antiques, but they were electrically driven and quite soundless. Seldon wondered if "antique" was always a word to sneer at. Could it be that silence made up for slowness? Was there any particular hurry to life, after all?
There were a number of children on the walkways and Seldons lips pressed together in annoyance. Clearly, an extended life span for the Mycogenians was impossible unless they were willing to indulge in infanticide. The children of both sexes (though it was hard to tell the boys from the girls) wore kirtles that came only a few inches below the knee, making the wild activity of childhood easier.
The children also still had hair, reduced to an inch in length at most, but even so the older ones among them had hoods attached to their kirtles and wore them raised, hiding the top of the head altogether. It was as though they were getting old enough to make the hair seem a trifle obscene--or old enough to be wishing to hide it, in longing for the day of rite of passage when they were depilated.
A thought occurred to Seldon. He said, "Dors, when youve been out shopping, who paid, you or the Raindrop women?"
"I did of course. The Raindrops never produced a credit tile. But why should they? What was being bought was for us, not for them."
"But you have a Trantorian credit tile--a tribeswoman credit tile."
"Of course, Hari, but there was no problem. The people of Mycogen may keep their own culture and ways of thought and habits of life as they wish. They can destroy their cephalic hair and wear kirtles. Nevertheless, they must use the worlds credits. If they dont, that would choke off commerce and no sensible person would want to do that. The credits nerve, Hari." She held up her hand as though she was holding an invisible credit tile.
"And they accepted your credit tile?"
"Never a peep out of them. And never a word about my skincap. Credits sanitize everything."
"Well, thats good. So I can buy--"
"No, Ill do the buying. Credits may sanitize everything, but they more easily sanitize a tribeswoman. Theyre so used to paying women little or no attention that they automatically pay me the same.--And heres the clothing store Ive been using."
"Ill wait out here. Get me a nice red sash--one that looks impressive."
"Dont pretend youve forgotten our decision. Ill get two. And another white kirtle also ... to my measurements."
"Wont they think it odd that a woman would be buying a white kirtle?"
"Of course not. Theyll assume Im buying it for a male companion who happens to be my size. Actually, I dont think theyll bother with any assumptions at all as long as my credit tile is good."
Seldon waited, half-expecting someone to come up and greet him as a tribesman or denounce him as one--more likely--but no one did. Those who passed him did so without a glance and even those who glanced in his direction moved on seemingly untouched. He was especially nervous about the gray kirtles--the women--walking by in pairs or, even worse, with a man. They were downtrodden, unnoticed, snubbed. How better to gain a brief notoriety than by shrieking at the sight of a tribesman? But even the women moved on.
Theyre not expecting to see a tribesman, Seldon thought, so they dont see one.
That, he decided, augured well for their forthcoming invasion of the Sacratorium. How much less would anyone expect to see tribespeople there and how much more effectively would they therefore fail to see them! He was in fairly good humor when Dors emerged.
"You have everything?"
"Absolutely."
"Then lets go back to the room, so you can change." The white kirtle did not fit her quite as well as the gray one did. Obviously, she could not have tried it on or even the densest shopkeeper would have been struck with alarm.
"How do I look, Hari?" she asked.
"Exactly like a boy," said Seldon. "Now lets try the sash ... or obiah. I had better get used to calling it that."
Dors, without her skincap, was shaking out her hair gratefully. She said sharply, "Dont put it on now. Were not going to parade through Mycogen with the sash on. The last thing we want to do is call attention to ourselves."
"No, no. I just want to see how it goes on."
"Well, not that one. This one is better quality and more elaborate."
"Youre right, Dors. Ive got to gather in what attention there is. I dont want them to detect you as a woman."
"Im not thinking of that, Hari. I just want you to look pretty."
"A thousand thanks, but thats impossible, I suspect. Now, lets see, how does this work?"
Together, Hari and Dors practiced putting their obiahs on and taking them off, over and over again, until they could do it in one fluid motion. Dors taught Hari how to do it, as she had seen a man doing it the day before at the Sacratorium.
When Hari praised her for her acute observations, she blushed and said, "Its really nothing, Hari, just something I noticed."
Hari replied, "Then youre a genius for noticing."
Finally satisfied, they stood well apart, each surveying the other. Haris obiah glittered, a bright red dragonlike design standing out against a paler field of similar hue. Dorss was a little less bold, had a simple thin line down the center, and was very light in color.
"There," she said, "just enough to show good taste." She took it off.
"Now," said Seldon, "we fold it up and it goes into one of the inner pockets. I have my credit tile--Hummins, really--and the key to this place in this one and here, on the other side, the Book."
"The Book? Should you be carrying it around?"
"I must. Im guessing that anyone going to the Sacratorium ought to have a copy of the Book with him. They may intone passages or have readings. If necessary, well share the Book and maybe no one will notice. Ready?"
"Ill never be ready, but Im going with you."
"It will be a tedious trip. Will you check my skincap and make sure no hair shows this time? And dont scratch your head."
"I wont. You look all right."
"So do you."
"You also look nervous."
And Seldon said wryly, "Guess why!"
Dors reached out impulsively and squeezed Haris hand, then drew back as if surprised at herself. Looking down, she straightened her white kirtle.
Hari, himself a trifle surprised and peculiarly pleased, cleared his throat and said, "Okay, lets go."
Aerie
ROBOT-- ... A term used in the ancient legends of several worlds for what are more usually called "automata." Robots are described as generally human in shape and made of metal, although some are supposed to have been pseudo-organic in nature. Hari Seldon, in the course of The Flight, is popularly supposed to have seen an actual robot, but that story is of dubious origin. Nowhere in Seldons voluminous writings does he mention robots at all, although ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

Chapter 56

They were not noticed.
Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili repeated the trip of the day before and this time no one gave them a second look. Hardly anyone even gave them a first look. On several occasions, they had to tuck their knees to one side to allow someone sitting on an inner seat to get past them and out. When someone got in, they quickly realized they had to move over if there was an inner empty seat. This time they quickly grew tired of the smell of kirtles that were not freshly laundered because they were not so easily diverted by what went on outside. But eventually they were there.
"Thats the library," said Seldon in a low voice.
"I suppose so," said Dors. "At least thats the building that Mycelium Seventy-Two pointed out yesterday."
They sauntered toward it leisurely.
"Take a deep breath," said Seldon. "This is the first hurdle."
The door ahead was open, the light within subdued. There were five broad stone steps leading upward. They stepped onto the lowermost one and waited several moments before they realized that their weight did not cause the steps to move upward. Dors grimaced very slightly and gestured Seldon upward. Together they walked up the stairs, feeling embarrassed on behalf of Mycogen for its backwardness.
Then, through a door, where, at a desk immediately inside was a man bent over the simplest and clumsiest computer Seldon had ever seen. The man did not look up at them. No need, Seldon supposed. White kirtle, bald head--all Mycogenians looked so nearly the same that ones eyes slid off them and that was to the tribespeoples advantage at the moment.
The man, who still seemed to be studying something on the desk, said, "Scholars?"
"Scholars," said Seldon.
The man jerked his head toward a door. "Go in. Enjoy."
They moved inward and, as nearly as they could see, they were the only ones in this section of the library. Either the library was not a popular resort or the scholars were few or--most likely--both.
Seldon whispered, "I thought surely we would have to present some sort of license or permission form and I would have to plead having forgotten it."
"He probably welcomes our presence under any terms. Did you ever see a place like this? If a place, like a person, could be dead, we would be inside a corpse."
Most of the books in this section were print-books like the Book in Seldons inner pocket. Dors drifted along the shelves, studying them. She said, "Old books, for the most part. Part classic. Part worthless."
"Outside books? Non-Mycogen, I mean?"
"Oh yes. If they have their own books, they must be kept in another section. This one is for outside research for poor little self-styled scholars like yesterdays.--This is the reference department and heres an Imperial Encyclopedia ... must be fifty years old if a day ... and a computer." She reached for the keys and Seldon stopped her.
"Wait. Something could go wrong and well be delayed."
He pointed to a discreet sign above a free-standing set of shelves that glowed with the letters TO THE SACR TORIUM. The second A in SACRATORIUM was dead, possibly recently or possibly because no one cared. (The Empire, thought Seldon, was in decay. All parts of it. Mycogen too.)
He looked about. The poor library, so necessary to Mycogenian pride, perhaps so useful to the Elders who could use it to find crumbs to shore up their own beliefs and present them as being those of sophisticated tribespeople, seemed to be completely empty. No one had entered after them.
Seldon said, "Lets step in here, out of eyeshot of the man at the door, and put on our sashes."
And then, at the door, aware suddenly there would be no turning back if they passed this second hurdle, he said, "Dors, dont come in with me."
She frowned. "Why not?"
"Its not safe and I dont want you to be at risk."
"I am here to protect you," she said with soft firmness.
"What kind of protection can you be? I can protect myself, though you may not think it. And Id be handicapped by having to protect you. Dont you see that?"
"You mustnt be concerned about me, Hari," said Dors. "Concern is my part." She tapped her sash where it crossed in the space between her obscured breasts.
"Because Hummin asked you to?"
"Because those are my orders."
She seized Seldons arms just above his elbow and, as always, he was surprised by her firm grip. She said, "Im against this, Hari, but if you feel you must go in, then I must go in too."
"All right, then. But if anything happens and you can wriggle out of it, run. Dont worry about me."
"Youre wasting your breath, Hari. And youre insulting me."
Seldon touched the entrance panel and the portal slid open. Together, almost in unison, they walked through.


Chapter 57

A large room, all the larger because it was empty of anything resembling furniture. No chairs, no benches, no seats of any kind. No stage, no drapery, no decorations.
No lights, merely a uniform illumination of mild, unfocused light. The walls were not entirely blank. Periodically, arranged in spaced fashion at various heights and in no easy repetitive order, there were small, primitive, two-dimensional television screens, all of which were operating. From where Dors and Seldon stood, there was not even the illusion of a third dimension, not a breath of true holovision.
There were people present. Not many and nowhere together. They stood singly and, like the television monitors, in no easy repetitive order. All were white-kirtled, all sashed.
For the most part, there was silence. No one talked in the usual sense. Some moved their lips, murmuring softly. Those who walked did so stealthily, eyes downcast.
The atmosphere was absolutely funereal.
Seldon leaned toward Dors, who instantly put a finger to her lips, then pointed to one of the television monitors. The screen showed an idyllic garden bursting with blooms, the camera panning over it slowly. They walked toward the monitor in a fashion that imitated the others--slow steps, putting each foot down softly.
When they were within half a meter of the screen, a soft insinuating voice made itself heard: "The garden of Antennin, as reproduced from ancient guidebooks and photographs, located in the outskirts of Eos. Note the--"
Dors said in a whisper Seldon had trouble catching over the sound of the set, "It turns on when someone is close and it will turn off if we step away. If were close enough, we can talk under cover, but dont look at me and stop speaking if anyone approaches."
Seldon, his head bent, his hands clasped before him (he had noted that this was a preferred posture), said, "Any moment I expect someone to start wailing."
"Someone might. Theyre mourning their Lost World," said Dors.
"I hope they change the films every once in a while. It would be deadly to always see the same ones."
"Theyre all different," said Dors, her eyes sliding this way and that. "They may change periodically. I dont know."
"Wait!" said Seldon just a hairs breadth too loud. He lowered his voice and said, "Come this way."
Dors frowned, failing to make out the words, but Seldon gestured slightly with his head. Again the stealthy walk, but Seldons footsteps increased in length as he felt the need for greater speed and Dors, catching up, pulled sharply--if very briefly--at his kirtle. He slowed.
"Robots here," he said under the cover of the sound as it came on. The picture showed the corner of a dwelling place with a rolling lawn and a line of hedges in the foreground and three of what could only be described as robots. They were metallic, apparently, and vaguely human in shape.
The recording said, "This is a view, recently constructed, of the establishment of the famous Wendome estate of the third century. The robot you see near the center was, according to tradition, named Bendar and served twenty-two years, according to the ancient records, before being replaced."
Dors said, " Recently constructed, so they must change views."
"Unless theyve been saying recently constructed for the last thousand years."
Another Mycogenian stepped into the sound pattern of the scene and said in a low voice, though not as low as the whisperings of Seldon and Dors, "Greetings, Brothers."
He did not look at Seldon and Dors as he spoke and after one involuntary and startled glance, Seldon kept his head averted. Dors had ignored it all. Seldon hesitated. Mycelium Seventy-Two had said that there was no talking in the Sacratorium. Perhaps he had exaggerated. Then too he had not been in the Sacratorium since he was a child.
Desperately, Seldon decided he must speak. He said in a whisper, "And to you, Brother, greetings."
He had no idea whether that was the correct formula of reply or if there was a formula, but the Mycogenian seemed to find nothing amiss in it. "To you in Aurora," he said.
"And to you," said Seldon and because it seemed to him that the other expected more, he added, "in Aurora," and there was an impalpable release of tension. Seldon felt his forehead growing moist.
The Mycogenian said, "Beautiful! I havent seen this before."
"Skillfully done," said Seldon. Then, in a burst of daring, he added, "A loss never to be forgotten."
The other seemed startled, then said, "Indeed, indeed," and moved away.
Dors hissed, "Take no chances. Dont say what you dont have to."
"It seemed natural. Anyway, this it recent. But those are disappointing robots. They are what I would expect automata to be. I want to see the organic ones--the humanoids."
"If they existed," said Dors with some hesitation, "it seems to me they wouldnt be used for gardening jobs."
"True," said Seldon. "We must find the Elders aerie."
"If that exists. It seems to me there is nothing in this hollow cave but a hollow cave."
"Lets look."
They paced along the wall, passing from screen to screen, trying to wait at each for irregular intervals until Dors clutched Seldons arms. Between two screens were lines marking out a faint rectangle.
"A door," Dors said. Then she weakened the assertion by adding, "Do you think?"
Seldon looked about surreptitiously. It was in the highest degree convenient that, in keeping with the mourning atmosphere, every face, when not fixed on a television monitor, was bent in sad concentration on the floor.
Seldon said, "How do you suppose it would open?"
"An entrance patch."
"I cant make out any."
"Its just not marked out, but theres a slight discoloration there. Do you see it? How many palms? How many times?"
"Ill try. Keep an eye out and kick me if anyone looks in this direction."
He held his breath casually, touched the discolored spot to no avail, and then placed his palm full upon it and pressed.
The door opened silently--not a creak, not a scrape.
Seldon stepped through as rapidly as he could and Dors followed him. The door closed behind them.
"The question is," said Dors, "did anyone see us?"
Seldon said, "Elders must go through this door frequently."
"Yes, but will anyone think we are Elders?"
Seldon waited, then said, "If we were observed and if anyone thought something was wrong, this door would have been flung open again within fifteen seconds of our entering."
"Possibly," said Dors dryly, "or possibly there is nothing to be seen or done on this side of the door and no one cares if we enter."
"That remains to be seen," muttered Seldon.
The rather narrow room they had entered was somewhat dark, but as they stepped farther into it, the light brightened.
There were chairs, wide and comfortable, small tables, several davenports, a deep and tall refrigerator, cupboards.
"If this is the Elders aerie," said Seldon, "the Elders seem to do themselves comfortably, despite the austerity of the Sacratorium itself."
"As would be expected," said Dors. "Asceticism among a ruling class--except for public show--is very rare. Put that down in your notebook for psychohistorical aphorisms." She looked about. "And there is no robot."
Seldon said, "An aerie is a high position, remember, and this ceiling is not. There must be upper storeys and that must be the way." He pointed to a well-carpeted stairway.
He did not advance toward it, however, but looked about vaguely.
Dors guessed what he was seeking. She said, "Forget about elevators. Theres a cult of primitivism in Mycogen. Surely, you havent forgotten that, have you? There would be no elevators and, whats more, if we place our weight at the foot of the stairs, I am quite certain it will not begin moving upward. Were going to have to climb it. Several flights, perhaps."
"Climb it?"
"It must, in the nature of things, lead to the aerie--if it leads anywhere. Do you want to see the aerie or dont you?"
Together they stepped toward the staircase and began the climb. They went up three flights and, as they did, the light level decreased perceptibly and in steady increments. Seldon took a deep breath and whispered, "I consider myself to be in pretty good shape, but I hate this."
"Youre not used to this precise type of physical exertion." She showed no signs of physical distress whatever.
At the top of the third flight the stairs ended and before them was another door.
"And if its locked?" said Seldon, more to himself than to Dors. "Do we try to break it down?"
But Dors said, "Why should it be locked when the lower door was not? If this is the Elders aerie, I imagine theres a taboo on anyone but Elders coming here and a taboo is much stronger than any lock."
"As far as those who accept the taboo are concerned," said Seldon, but he made no move toward the door.
"Theres still time to turn back, since you hesitate," said Dors. "In fact, I would advise you to rum back."
"I only hesitate because I dont know what well find inside. If its empty--" And then he added in a rather louder voice, "Then its empty," and he strode forward and pushed against the entry panel.
The door retracted with silent speed and Seldon took a step back at the surprising flood of light from within.
And there, facing him, eyes alive with light, arms half-upraised, one foot slightly advanced before the other, gleaming with a faintly yellow metallic shine, was a human figure. For a few moments, it seemed to be wearing a tight-fitting tunic, but on closer inspection it became apparent that the tunic was part of the structure of the object.
"Its the robot," said Seldon in awe, "but its metallic."
"Worse than that," said Dors, who had stepped quickly to one side and then to the other. "Its eyes dont follow me. Its arms dont as much as tremble. Its not alive--if one can speak of robots as being alive." And a man--unmistakably a man--stepped out from behind the robot and said, "Perhaps not. But I am alive."
And almost automatically, Dors stepped forward and took her place between Seldon and the man who had suddenly appeared.

Chapter 58

Seldon pushed Dors to one side, perhaps a shade more roughly than he intended.
"I dont need protection. This is our old friend Sunmaster Fourteen." The man who faced them, wearing a double sash that was perhaps his right as High Elder, said, "And you are Tribesman Seldon."
"Of course," said Seldon.
"And this, despite her masculine dress, is Tribeswoman Venabili."
Dors said nothing.
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "You are right, of course, tribesman. You are in no danger of physical harm from me. Please sit down. Both of you. Since you are not a Sister, tribeswoman, you need not retire. There is a seat for you which, if you value such a distinction, you will be the first woman ever to have used."
"I do not value such a distinction," said Dors, spacing her words for emphasis. Sunmaster Fourteen nodded.
"That is as you wish. I too will sit down, for I must ask you questions and I do not care to do it standing." They were sitting now in a corner of the room. Seldons eyes wandered to the metal robot.
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "It is a robot."
"I know," said Seldon briefly.
"I know you do," said Sunmaster Fourteen with similar curtness. "But now that we have settled that matter, why are you here?"
Seldon gazed steadily at Sunmaster Fourteen and said, "To see the robot."
"Do you know that no one but an Elder is allowed in the aerie?"
"I did not know that, but I suspected it."
"Do you know that no tribesperson is allowed in the Sacratorium?"
"I was told that."
"And you ignored the fact, is that it?"
"As I said, we wanted to see the robot."
"Do you know that no woman, even a Sister, is allowed in the Sacratorium except at certain stated--and rare--occasions?"
"I was told that."
"And do you know that no woman is at any time--or for any reason--allowed to dress in masculine garb? That holds, within the borders of Mycogen, for tribeswomen as well as for Sisters."
"I was not told that, but I am not surprised."
"Good. I want you to understand all this. Now, why did you want to see the robot?"
Seldon said with a shrug, "Curiosity. I had never seen a robot or even known that such a thing existed."
"And how did you come to know that it did exist and, specifically, that it existed here?"
Seldon was silent, then said, "I do not wish to answer that question."
"Is that why you were brought to Mycogen by Tribesman Hummin? To investigate robots?"
"No. Tribesman Hummin brought us here that we might be secure. However, we are scholars, Dr. Venabili and I. Knowledge is our province and to gain knowledge is our purpose. Mycogen is little understood outside its borders and we wish to know more about your ways and your methods of thought. It is a natural desire and, it seems to us, a harmless--even praiseworthy--one."
"Ah, but we do not wish the outer tribes and worlds to know about us. That is our natural desire and we are the judge of what is harmless to us and what harmful. So I ask you again, tribesman: How did you know that a robot existed in Mycogen and that it existed in this room?"
"General rumor," said Seldon at length.
"Do you insist on that?"
"General rumor. I insist on it."
Sunmaster Fourteens keen blue eyes seemed to sharpen and he said without raising his voice, "Tribesman Seldon, we have long cooperated with Tribesman Hummin. For a tribesman, he has seemed a decent and trustworthy individual. For a tribesman! When he brought you two to us and commended you to our protection, we granted it. But Tribesman Hummin, whatever his virtues, is still a tribesman and we had misgivings. We were not at all sure what your--or his--real purpose might be."
"Our purpose was knowledge," said Seldon. "Academic knowledge. Tribeswoman Venabili is a historian and I too have an interest in history. Why should we not be interested in Mycogenian history?"
"For one thing, because we do not wish you to be.--In any case, two of our trusted Sisters were sent to you. They were to cooperate with you, try to find out what it was you wanted, and--what is the expression you tribesmen use?--play along with you. Yet not in such a way that you would be too aware as to what was happening."
Sunmaster Fourteen smiled, but it was a grim smile. "Raindrop Forty-Five," Sunmaster Fourteen went on, "went shopping with Tribeswoman Venabili, but there seemed nothing out of the way in what happened on those trips. Naturally, we had a full report. Raindrop Forty-Three showed you, Tribesman Seldon, our microfarms. You might have been suspicious of her willingness to accompany you alone, something that is utterly out of the question for us, but you reasoned that what applied to Brothers did not apply to tribesmen and you flattered yourself that that flimsy bit of reasoning won her over. She complied with your desire, though at considerable cost to her peace of mind. And, eventually, you asked for the Book. To have handed it over too easily might have roused your suspicion, so she pretended to a perverse desire only you could satisfy. Her self-sacrifice will not be forgotten.--I take it, tribesman, you still have the Book and I suspect you have it with you now. May I have it?"
Seldon sat in bitter silence.
Sunmaster Fourteens wrinkled hand remained obtrusively outstretched and he said, "How much better it would be than to wrest it from you by force."
And Seldon handed it over.
Sunmaster Fourteen leafed through its pages briefly, as though to reassure himself it was unharmed. He said with a small sigh, "It will have to be carefully destroyed in the approved manner. Sad.--But once you had this Book, we were, of course, not surprised when you made your way out to the Sacratorium. You were watched at all times, for you cannot think that any Brother or Sister, not totally absorbed, would not recognize you for tribespeople at a glance. We know a skincap when we see one and there are less than seventy of them in Mycogen ... almost all belonging to tribesmen on official business who remain entirely in secular governmental buildings during the time they are here. So you were not only seen but unmistakably identified, over and over.
"The elderly Brother who met you was careful to tell you about the library as well as about the Sacratorium, but he was also careful to tell you what you were forbidden to do, for we did not wish to entrap you. Skystrip Two also warned you ... and quite forcibly. Nevertheless, you did not turn away.
"The shop at which you bought the white kirtle and the two sashes informed us at once and from that we knew well what you intended. The library was kept empty, the librarian was warned to keep his eyes to himself, the Sacratorium was kept under-utilized. The one Brother who inadvertently spoke to you almost gave it away, but hastened off when he realized with whom he was dealing. And then you came up here.
"You see, then, that it was your intention to come up here and that we in no way lured you here. You came as a result of your own action, your own desire, and what I want to ask you--yet once again--is: Why?"
It was Dors who answered this time, her voice firm, her eyes hard. "We will tell you yet once again, Mycogenian. We are scholars, who consider knowledge sacred and it is only knowledge that we seek. You did not lure us here, but you did not stop us either, as you might have done before ever we approached this building. You smoothed our way and made it easy for us and even that might be considered a lure. And what harm have we done? We have in no way disturbed the building, or this room, or you, or that."
She pointed to the robot. "It is a dead lump of metal that you hide here and we now know that it is dead and that is all the knowledge we sought. We thought it would be more significant and we are disappointed, but now that we know it is merely what it is, we will leave--and, if you wish, we will leave Mycogen as well."
Sunmaster Fourteen listened with no trace of expression on his face, but when she was done, he addressed Seldon, saying, "This robot, as you see it, is a symbol, a symbol of all we have lost and of all we no longer have, of all that, through thousands of years, we have not forgotten and what we intend someday to return to. Because it is all that remains to us that is both material and authentic, it is dear to us--yet to your woman it is only a dead lump of metal. Do you associate yourself with that judgment, Tribesman Seldon?"
Seldon said, "We are members of societies that do not tie ourselves to a past that is thousands of years old, making no contact at all with what has existed between that past and ourselves. We live in the present, which we recognize as the product of all the past and not of one long-gone moment of time that we hug to our chests. We realize, intellectually, what the robot may mean to you and we are willing to let it continue to mean that to you. But we can only see it with our own eyes, as you can only see it with yours. To us, it is a dead lump of metal."
"And now," said Dors, "we will leave."
"You will not," said Sunmaster Fourteen. "By coming here, you have committed a crime. It is a crime only in our eyes, as you will hasten to point out"--his lips curved in a wintry smile--"but this is our territory and, within it, we make the definitions. And this crime, as we define it, is punishable by death."
"And you are going to shoot us down?" said Dors haughtily.
Sunmaster Fourteens expression was one of contempt and he continued to speak only to Seldon. "What do you think we are, Tribesman Seldon? Our culture is as old as yours, as complex, as civilized, as humane. I am not armed. You will be tried and, since you are manifestly guilty, executed according to law, quickly and painlessly.
"If you were to try to leave now, I would not stop you, but there are many Brothers below, many more than there appeared to be when you entered the Sacratorium and, in their rage at your action, they may lay rough and forceful hands on you. It has happened in our history that tribespeople have even died so and it is not a pleasant death--certainly not a painless one."
"We were warned of this," said Dors, "by Skystrip Two. So much for your complex, civilized, and humane culture."
"People can be moved to violence at moments of emotion, Tribesman Seldon," said Sunmaster Fourteen calmly, "whatever their humanity in moments of calm. This is true in every culture, as your woman, who is said to be a historian, must surely know."
Seldon said, "Let us remain reasonable, Sunmaster Fourteen. You may be the law in Mycogen over local affairs, but you are not the law over us and you know it. We are both non-Mycogenian citizens of the Empire and it is the Emperor and his designated legal officers who must remain in charge of any capital offense."
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "That may be so in statutes and on papers and on holovision screens, but we are not talking theory now. The High Elder has long had the power to punish crimes of sacrilege without interference from the Imperial throne."
"If the criminals are your own people," said Seldon. "It would be quite different if they were outsiders."
"I doubt it in this case. Tribesman Hummin brought you here as fugitives and we are not so yeast-headed in Mycogen that we dont strongly suspect that you are fugitives from the Emperors laws. Why should he object if we do his work for him?"
"Because," said Seldon, "he would. Even if we were fugitives from the Imperial authorities and even if he wanted us only to punish us, he would still want us. To allow you to kill, by whatever means and for whatever reason, non-Mycogenians without due Imperial process would be to defy his authority and no Emperor could allow such a precedent. No matter how eager he might be to see that the microfood trade not be interrupted, he would still feel it necessary to re-establish the Imperial prerogative. Do you wish, in your eagerness to kill us, to have a division of Imperial soldiery loot your farms and your dwellings, desecrate your Sacratorium, and take liberties with the Sisters: Consider."
Sunmaster Fourteen smiled once again, but displayed no softness. "Actually, I have considered and there is an alternative. After we condemn you, we could delay your execution to allow you to appeal to the Emperor for a review of your case. The Emperor might be grateful at this evidence of our ready submission to his authority and grateful too to lay his hands on you two--for some reason of his own--and Mycogen might profit. Is that what you want, then? To appeal to the Emperor in due course and to be delivered to him?"
Seldon and Dors looked at each other briefly and were silent.
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "I feel you would rather be delivered to the Emperor than die, but why do I get the impression that the preference is only by a slight margin?"
"Actually," said a new voice, "I think neither alternative is acceptable and that we must search for a third."

Chapter 59

It was Dors who identified the newcomer first, perhaps because it was she who expected him.
"Hummin," she said, "thank goodness you found us. I got in touch with you the moment I realized I was not going to deflect Hari from"--she held up her hands in a wide gesture "this."
Hummins smile was a small one that did not alter the natural gravity of his face. There was a subtle weariness about him.
"My dear," he said, "I was engaged in other things. I cannot always pull away at a moments notice. And when I got here, I had, like you two, to supply myself with a kirtle and sash, to say nothing of a skincap, and make my way out here. Had I been here earlier, I might have stopped this, but I believe Im not too late."
Sunmaster Fourteen had recovered from what had seemed to be a painful shock. He said in a voice that lacked its customary severe depth, "How did you get in here, Tribesman Hummin?"
"It was not easy, High Elder, but as Tribeswoman Venabili likes to say, I am a very persuasive person. Some of the citizens here remember who I was and what I have done for Mycogen in the past, that I am even an honorary Brother. Have you forgotten, Sunmaster Fourteen?"
The Elder replied, "I have not forgotten, but even the most favorable memory can not survive certain actions. A tribesman here and a tribeswoman. There is no greater crime. All you have done is not great enough to balance that. My people are not unmindful. We will make it up to you some other way. But these two must die or be handed over to the Emperor."
"I am also here," said Hummin calmly. "Is that not a crime as well?"
"For you," said Sunmaster Fourteen, "for you personally, as a kind of honorary Brother, I can ... overlook it ... once. Not these two."
"Because you expect a reward from the Emperor? Some favor? Some concession? Have you already been in touch with him or with his Chief of Staff, Eto Demerzel, more likely?"
"That is not a subject for discussion."
"Which is itself an admission. Come on, I dont ask what the Emperor promised, but it cannot be much. He does not have much to give in these degenerate days. Let me make you an offer. Have these two told you they are scholars?"
"They have."
"And they are. They are not lying. The tribeswoman is a historian and the tribesman is a mathematician. The two together are trying to combine their talents to make a mathematics of history and they call the combined subject psychohistory. "
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "I know nothing about this psychohistory, nor do I care to know. Neither it nor any other facet of your tribal learning interests me."
"Nevertheless," said Hummin, "I suggest that you listen to me."
It took Hummin some fifteen minutes, speaking concisely, to describe the possibility of organizing the natural laws of society (something he always mentioned with audible quotation marks in the tone of his voice) in such a way as to make it possible to anticipate the future with a substantial degree of probability.
And when he was done, Sunmaster Fourteen, who had listened expressionlessly, said, "A highly unlikely piece of speculation, I should say."
Seldon, with a rueful expression, seemed about to speak, undoubtedly to agree, but Hummins hand, resting lightly on the others knee, tightened unmistakably.
Hummin said, "Possibly, High Elder, but the Emperor doesnt think so. And by the Emperor, who is himself an amiable enough personage, I really mean Demerzel, concerning whose ambitions you need no instruction. They would like very much to have these two scholars, which is why Ive brought them here for safekeeping. I had little expectation that you would do Demerzels work for him by delivering the scholars to him."
"They have committed a crime that--"
"Yes, we know, High Elder, but it is only a crime because you choose to call it so. No real harm has been done."
"It has been done to our belief, to our deepest felt--"
"But imagine what harm will be done if psychohistory falls into the hands of Demerzel. Yes, I grant that nothing may come of it, but suppose for a moment that something does and that the Imperial government has the use of it--can foretell what is to come--can take measures with that foreknowledge which no one else would have--can take measures, in fact, designed to bring about an alternate future more to the Imperial liking."
"Well?"
"Is there any doubt, High Elder, that the alternate future more to the Imperial liking would be one of tightened centralization? For centuries now, as you very well know, the Empire has been undergoing a steady decentralization. Many worlds now acknowledge only lip service to the Emperor and virtually rule themselves. Even here on Trantor, there is decentralization. Mycogen, as only one example, is free of Imperial interference for the most part. You rule its High Elder and there is no Imperial officer at your side overseeing your actions and decisions. How long do you think that will last with men like Demerzel adjusting the future to their liking?"
"Still the flimsiest of speculation," said Sunmaster Fourteen, "but a disturbing one, I admit."
"On the other hand, if these scholars can complete their task, an unlikely if, you might say, but an if--then they are sure to remember that you spared them when you might have chosen not to. And it would then be conceivable that they would learn to arrange a future, for instance, that would allow Mycogen to be given a world of its own, a world that could be terraformed into a close replica of the Lost World. And even if these two forget your kindness, I will be here to remind them."
"Well--" said Sunmaster Fourteen.
"Come on," said Hummin, "it is not hard to decide what must be going through your mind. Of all tribespeople, you must trust Demerzel the least. And though the chance of psychohistory might be small (if I was not being honest with you, I would not admit that) it is not zero; and if it will bring about a restoration of the Lost World, what can you want more than that? What would you not risk for even a tiny chance of that? Come now--I promise you and my promises are not lightly given. Release these two and choose a tiny chance of your hearts desire over no chance at all."
There was silence and then Sunmaster Fourteen sighed. "I dont know how it is, Tribesman Hummin, but on every occasion that we meet, you persuade me into something I do not really want to do."
"Have I ever misled you, High Elder?"
"You have never offered me so small a chance?"
"And so high a possible reward. The one balances the other."
And Sunmaster Fourteen nodded his head. "You are right. Take these two and take them out of Mycogen and never let me see them again unless there comes a time when--But surely it will not be in my lifetime."
"Perhaps not, High Elder. But your people have been waiting patiently for nearly twenty thousand years. Would you then object to waiting another--perhaps--two hundred?"
"I would not willingly wait one moment, but my people will wait as long as they must."
And standing up, he said, "I will clear the path. Take them and go."

Chapter 60

They were finally back in a tunnel. Hummin and Seldon had traveled through one when they went from the Imperial Sector to Streeling University in the air-taxi. Now they were in another tunnel, going from Mycogen to ... Seldon did not know where. He hesitated to ask. Hummins face seemed as if it was carved out of granite and it didnt welcome conversation.
Hummin sat in the front of the four-seater, with no one to his right. Seldon and Dors shared the backseat.
Seldon chanced a smile at Dors, who looked glum. "Its nice to be in real clothes again, isnt it?"
"I will never," said Dors with enormous sincerity, "wear or look at anything that resembles a kirtle. And I will never, under any circumstances, wear a skincap. In fact, Im going to feel odd if I ever see a normally bald man." And it was Dors who finally asked the question that Seldon had been reluctant to advance. "Chetter," she said rather petulantly, "why wont you tell us where were going?"
Hummin hitched himself into a sideways position and he looked back at Dors and Seldon gravely. "Somewhere," he said, "where it may be difficult for you to get into trouble--although Im not sure such a place exists."
Dors was at once crestfallen. "Actually, Chetter, its my fault. At Streeling, I let Hari go Upperside without accompanying him. In Mycogen, I at least accompanied him, but I suppose I ought not to have let him enter the Sacratorium at all."
"I was determined," said Seldon warmly. "It was in no way Dorss fault."
Hummin made no effort to apportion blame. He simply said, "I gather you wanted to see the robot. Was there a reason for that? Can you tell me?"
Seldon could feel himself redden. "I was wrong in that respect, Hummin. I did not see what I expected to see or what I hoped to see. If I had known the content of the aerie, I would never have bothered going there. Call it a complete fiasco."
"But then, Seldon, what was it you hoped to see? Please tell me. Take your time if you wish. This is a long trip and I am willing to listen."
"The thing is, Hummin, that I had the idea that there were humaniform robots, that they were long-lived, that at least one might still be alive, and that it might be in the aerie. There was a robot there, but it was metallic, it was dead, and it was merely a symbol. Had I but known--"
"Yes. Did we all but know, there would be no need for questions or for research of any kind. Where did you get your information about humaniform robots? Since no Mycogenian would have discussed that with you, I can think of only one source. The Mycogenian Book--a powered print-book in ancient Auroran and modern Galactic. Am I right?"
"Yes."
"And how did you get a copy?"
Seldon paused, then muttered, "Its somewhat embarrassing."
"I am not easily embarrassed, Seldon."
Seldon told him and Hummin allowed a very small smile to twitch across his face.
Hummin said, "Didnt it occur to you that what occurred had to be a charade? No Sister would do a thing like that--except under instruction and with a great deal of persuading."
Seldon frowned and said with asperity, "That was not at all obvious. People are perverted now and then. And its easy for you to grin. I didnt have the information you had and neither did Dors. If you did not wish me to fall into traps, you might have warned me of those that existed."
"I agree. I withdraw my remark. In any case, you dont have the Book any longer, Im sure."
"No. Sunmaster Fourteen took it from me."
"How much of it did you read?"
"Only a small fraction. I didnt have time. Its a huge book and I must tell you, Hummin, it is dreadfully dull."
"Yes, I know that, for I think I have read more of it than you have. It is not only dull, it is totally unreliable. It is a one-sided, official Mycogenian view of history that is more intent on presenting that view than a reasoned objectivity. It is even deliberately unclear in spots so that outsiders--even if they were to read the Book--would never know entirely what they read. What was it, for instance, that you thought you read about robots that interested you?"
"Ive already told you. They speak of humaniform robots, robots that could not be distinguished from human beings in outward appearance."
"How many of these would exist?" asked Hummin. "They dont say.--At least, I didnt come across a passage in which they gave numbers. There may have been only a handful, but one of them, the Book refers to as Renegade. It seems to have an unpleasant significance, but I couldnt make out what."
"You didnt tell me anything about that," interposed Dors. "If you had, I would have told you that its not a proper name. Its another archaic word and it means, roughly, what traitor would mean in Galactic. The older word has a greater aura of fear about it. A traitor, somehow, sneaks to his treason, but a renegade flaunts it."
Hummin said, "Ill leave the fine points of archaic language to you, Dors, but, in any case, if the Renegade actually existed and if it was a humaniform robot, then, clearly, as a traitor and enemy, it would not be preserved and venerated in the Elders aerie."
Seldon said, "I didnt know the meaning of Renegade, but, as I said, I did get the impression that it was an enemy. I thought it might have been defeated and preserved as a reminder of the Mycogenian triumph."
"Was there any indication in the Book that the Renegade was defeated?"
"No, but I might have missed that portion--"
"Not likely. Any Mycogenian victory would be announced in the Book unmistakably and referred to over and over again."
"There was another point the Book made about the Renegade," said Seldon, hesitating, "but I cant be at all sure I understood it." Hummin said, "As I told you ... They are deliberately obscure at times."
"Nevertheless, they seemed to say that the Renegade could somehow tap human emotions ... influence them--"
"Any politician can," said Hummin with a shrug. "Its called charisma--when it works."
Seldon sighed. "Well, I wanted to believe. That was it. I would have given a great deal to find an ancient humaniform robot that was still alive and that I could question."
"For what purpose?" asked Hummin.
"To learn the details of the primordial Galactic society when it still consisted of only a handful of worlds. From so small a Galaxy psychohistory could be deduced more easily."
Hummin said, "Are you sure you could trust what you heard? After many thousands of years, would you be willing to rely on the robots early memories? How much distortion would have entered into them?"
"Thats right," said Dors suddenly. "It would be like the computerized records I told you of, Hari. Slowly, those robot memories would be discarded, lost, erased, distorted. You can only go back so far and the farther you go back, the less reliable the information becomes--no matter what you do."
Hummin nodded. "Ive heard it referred to as a kind of uncertainty principle in information."
"But wouldnt it be possible," said Seldon thoughtfully, "that some information, for special reasons, would be preserved? Parts of the Mycogenian Book may well refer to events of twenty thousand years ago and yet be very largely as it had been originally. The more valued and the more carefully preserved particular information is, the more long-lasting and accurate it may be."
"The key word is particular. What the Book may care to preserve may not be what you wish to have preserved and what a robot may remember best may be what you wish him to remember least."
Seldon said in despair, "In whatever direction I turn to seek a way of working out psychohistory, matters so arrange themselves as to make it impossible. Why bother trying?"
"It might seem hopeless now," said Hummin unemotionally, "but given the necessary genius, a route to psychohistory may be found that none of us would at this moment expect. Give yourself more time.--But were coming to a rest area. Let us pull off and have dinner."
Over the lamb patties on rather tasteless bread (most unpalatable after the fare at Mycogen), Seldon said, "You seem to assume, Hummin, that I am the possessor of the necessary genius. I may not be, you know."
Hummin said, "Thats true. You may not be. However, I know of no alternate candidate for the post, so I must cling to you."
And Seldon sighed and said, "Well, Ill try, but Im out of any spark of hope. Possible but not practical, I said to begin with, and Im more convinced of that now than I ever was before."
Heatsink
AMARYL, YUGO-- ... A mathematician who, next to Hari Seldon himself, may be considered most responsible for working out the details of psychohistory. It was he who ...
... Yet the conditions under which he began life are almost more dramatic than his mathematical accomplishments. Born into the hopeless poverty of the lower classes of Dahl, a sector of ancient Trantor, he might have passed his life in utter obscurity were it not for the fact that Seldon, quite by accident, encountered him in the course of ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
apter 61
The Emperor of all the Galaxy felt weary--physically weary. His lips ached from the gracious smile he had had to place on his face at careful intervals. His neck was stiff from having inclined his head this way and that in a feigned show of interest. His ears pained from having to listen. His whole body throbbed from having to rise and to sit and to turn and to hold out his hand and to nod. It was merely a state function where one had to meet Mayors and Viceroys and Ministers and their wives or husbands from here and there in Trantor and (worse) from here and there in the Galaxy. There were nearly a thousand present, all in costumes that varied from the ornate to the downright outlandish, and he had had to listen to a babble of different accents made the worse by an effort to speak the Emperors Galactic as spoken at the Galactic University. Worst of all, the Emperor had had to remember to avoid making commitments of substance, while freely applying the lotion of words without substance. All had been recorded, sight and sound--very discreetly--and Eto Demerzel would go over it to see if Cleon, First of that Name, had behaved himself. That, of course, was only the way that the Emperor put it to himself. Demerzel would surely say that he was merely collecting data on any unintentional self-revelation on the pan of the guests. And perhaps he was. Fortunate Demerzel!
The Emperor could not leave the Palace and its extensive grounds, while Demerzel could range the Galaxy if he wished. The Emperor was always on display, always accessible, always forced to deal with visitors, from the important to the merely intrusive. Demerzel remained anonymous and never allowed himself to be seen inside the Palace grounds. He remained merely a fearsome name and an invisible (and therefore the more frightening) presence. The Emperor was the Inside Man with all the trappings and emoluments of power. Demerzel was the Outside Man, with nothing evident, not even a formal title, but with his fingers and mind probing everywhere and asking for no reward for his tireless labors but one--the reality of power.
It amused the Emperor--in a macabre sort of way--to consider that, at any moment, without warning, with a manufactured excuse or with none at all, he could have Demerzel arrested, imprisoned, exiled, tortured, or executed. After all, in these annoying centuries of constant unrest, the Emperor might have difficulty in exerting his will over the various planets of the Empire, even over the various sectors of Trantor--with their rabble of local executives and legislatures that he was forced to deal with in a maze of interlocking decrees, protocols, commitments, treaties, and general interstellar legalities--but at least his powers remained absolute over the Palace and its grounds. And yet Cleon knew that his dreams of power were useless. Demerzel had served his father and Cleon could not remember a time when he did not turn to Demerzel for everything. It was Demerzel who knew it all, devised it all, did it all. More than that, it was on Demerzel that anything that went wrong could be blamed. The Emperor himself remained above criticism and had nothing to fear--except, of course, palace coups and assassination by his nearest and dearest. It was to prevent this, above all, that he depended upon Demerzel. Emperor Cleon felt a tiny shudder at the thought of trying to do without Demerzel. There had been Emperors who had ruled personally, who had had a series of Chiefs of Staff of no talent, who had had incompetents serving in the post and had kept them--and somehow they had gotten along for a time and after a fashion.
But Cleon could not. He needed Demerzel. In fact, now that the thought of assassination had come to him--and, in view of the modern history of the Empire, it was inevitable that it had come to him--he could see that getting rid of Demerzel was quite impossible. It couldnt be done. No matter how cleverly he, Cleon, would attempt to arrange it, Demerzel (he was sure) would anticipate the move somehow, would know it was on its way, and would arrange, with far superior cleverness, a palace coup. Cleon would be dead before Demerzel could possibly be taken away in chains and there would simply be another Emperor that Demerzel would serve--and dominate.
Or would Demerzel tire of the game and make himself Emperor? Never! The habit of anonymity was too strong in him. If Demerzel exposed himself to the world, then his powers, his wisdom, his luck (whatever it was) would surely desert him. Cleon was convinced of that. He felt it to be beyond dispute.
So while he behaved himself, Cleon was safe. With no ambitions of his own, Demerzel would serve him faithfully.
And now here was Demerzel, dressed so severely and simply that it made Cleon uneasily conscious of the useless ornamentation of his robes of state, now thankfully removed with the aid of two valets. Naturally, it would not be until he was alone and in dishabille that Demerzel would glide into view. "Demerzel," said the Emperor of all the Galaxy, "I am tired!"
"State functions are tiring, Sire," murmured Demerzel.
"Then must I have them every evening?"
"Not every evening, but they are essential. It gratifies others to see you and to be taken note of by you. It helps keep the Empire running smoothly."
"The Empire used to be kept running smoothly by power," said the Emperor somberly. "Now it must be kept running by a smile, a wave of the hand, a murmured word, and a medal or a plaque."
"If all that keeps the peace, Sire, there is much to be said for it. And your reign proceeds well."
"You know why--because I have you at my side. My only real gift is that I am aware of your importance." He looked at Demerzel slyly. "My son need not be my heir. He is not a talented boy. What if I make you my heir?"
Demerzel said freezingly, "Sire, that is unthinkable. I would not usurp the throne. I would not steal it from your rightful heir. Besides, if I have displeased you, punish me justly. Surely, nothing I have done or could possibly do deserves the punishment of being made Emperor."
Cleon laughed. "For that true assessment of the value of the Imperial throne, Demerzel, I abandon any thought of punishing you. Come now, let us talk about something. I would sleep, but I am not yet ready for the ceremonies with which they put me to bed. Let us talk."
"About what, Sire?"
"About anything.--About that mathematician and his psychohistory. I think about him every once in a while, you know. I thought of him at dinner tonight. I wondered: What if a psychohistorical analysis would predict a method for making it possible to be an Emperor without endless ceremony?"
"I somehow think, Sire, that even the cleverest psychohistorian could not manage that."
"Well, tell me the latest. Is he still hiding among those peculiar baldheads of Mycogen? You promised you would winkle him out of there."
"So I did, Sire, and I moved in that direction, but I regret that I must say that I failed."
"Failed?" The Emperor allowed himself to frown. "I dont like that."
"Nor I, Sire. I planned to have the mathematician be encouraged to commit some blasphemous act--such acts are easy to commit in Mycogen, especially for an outsider--one that would call for severe punishment. The mathematician would then be forced to appeal to the Emperor and, as a result, we would get him. I planned it at the cost of insignificant concessions on our part--important to Mycogen, totally unimportant to us--and I meant to play no direct role in the arrangement. It was to be handled subtly."
"I dare say," said Cleon, "but it failed. Did the Mayor of Mycogen "He is called the High Elder, Sire."
"Do not quibble over titles. Did this High Elder refuse?"
"On the contrary, Sire, he agreed and the mathematician, Seldon, fell into the trap neatly."
"Well then?"
"He was allowed to leave unharmed."
"Why?" said Cleon indignantly.
"Of this I am not certain, Sire, but I suspect we were outbid."
"By whom? By the Mayor of Wye?"
"Possibly, Sire, but I doubt that. I have Wye under constant surveillance. If they had gained the mathematician, I would know it by now."
The Emperor was not merely frowning. He was clearly enraged. "Demerzel, this is bad. I am greatly displeased. A failure like this makes me wonder if you are perhaps not the man you once were. What measures shall we take against Mycogen for this clear defiance of the Emperors wishes?"
Demerzel bowed low in recognition of the storm unleashed, but he said in steely tones, "It would be a mistake to move against Mycogen now, Sire. The disruption that would follow would play into the hands of Wye."
"But we must do something."
"Perhaps not, Sire. It is not as bad as it may seem."
"How can it be not as bad as it seems?"
"Youll remember, Sire, that this mathematician was convinced that psychohistory was impractical."
"Of course I remember that, but that doesnt matter, does it? For our purposes?"
"Perhaps not. But if it were to become practical, it would serve our purposes to an infinitely great extent, Sire. And from what I have been able to find out, the mathematician is now attempting to make psychohistory practical. His blasphemous attempt in Mycogen was, I understand, part of an attempt at solving the problem of psychohistory. In that case, it may pay us, Sire, to leave him to himself. It will serve us better to pick him up when he is closer to his goal or has reached it."
"Not if Wye gets him first."
"That, I shall see to it, will not happen."
"In the same way that you succeeded in winkling the mathematician out of Mycogen just now?"
"I will not make a mistake the next time, Sire," said Demerzel coldly.
The Emperor said, "Demerzel, you had better not. I will not tolerate another mistake in this respect." And then he added pettishly, "I think I shall not sleep tonight after all."

Chapter 62

Jirad Tisalver of the Dahl Sector was short. The top of his head came up only to Hari Seldons nose. He did not seem to take that to heart, however. He had handsome, even features, was given to smiling, and sported a thick black mustache and crisply curling black hair.
He lived, with his wife and a half-grown daughter, in an apartment of seven small rooms, kept meticulously clean, but almost bare of furnishings. Tisalver said, "I apologize, Master Seldon and Mistress Venabili, that I cannot give you the luxury to which you must be accustomed, but Dahl is a poor sector and I am not even among the better-off among our people."
"The more reason," responded Seldon, "that we must apologize to you for placing the burden of our presence upon you."
"No burden, Master Seldon. Master Hummin has arranged to pay us generously for your use of our humble quarters and the credits would be welcome even if you were not--and you are."
Seldon remembered Hummins parting words when they finally arrived in Dahl. "Seldon" he had said, "this is the third place Ive arranged as sanctuary. The first two were notoriously beyond the reach of the Imperium, which might well have served to attract their attention; after all, they were logical places for you. This one is different. It is poor, unremarkable, and, as a matter of fact, unsafe in some ways. It is not a natural refuge for you, so that the Emperor and his Chief of Staff may not think to turn their eyes in this direction. Would you mind staying out of trouble this time, then?"
"I will try, Hummin," said Seldon, a little offended. "Please be aware that the trouble is not of my seeking. I am trying to learn what may well take me thirty lifetimes to learn if I am to have the slightest chance of organizing psychohistory."
"I understand," said Hummin. "Your efforts at learning brought you to Upperside in Streeling and to the Elders aerie in Mycogen and to who can guess where in Dahl. As for you, Dr. Venabili, I know youve been trying to take care of Seldon, but you must try harder. Get it fixed in your head that he is the most important person on Trantor--or in the Galaxy, for that matter--and that he must be kept secure at any cost."
"I will continue to do my best," said Dors stiffly. "And as for your host family, they have their peculiarities, but they are essentially good people with whom I have dealt before. Try not to get them in trouble either."
But Tisalver, at least, did not seem to anticipate trouble of any kind from his new tenants and his expressed pleasure at the company he now had--quite apart from the rent credits he would be getting--seemed quite sincere. He had never been outside Dahl and his appetite for tales of distant places was enormous. His wife too, bowing and smiling, would listen and their daughter, with a finger in her mouth, would allow one eye to peep from behind the door. It was usually after dinner, when the entire family assembled, that Seldon and Dors were expected to talk of the outside world. The food was plentiful enough, but it was bland and often tough. So soon after the tangy food of Mycogen, it was all but inedible.
The "table" was a long shelf against one wall and they ate standing up. Gentle questioning by Seldon elicited the fact that this was the usual situation among Dahlites as a whole and was not due to unusual poverty. Of course, Mistress Tisalver explained, there were those with high government jobs in Dahl who were prone to adopt all kinds of effete customs like chairs--she called them "body shelves"--but this was looked down upon by the solid middle class. Much as they disapproved of unnecessary luxury, though, the Tisalvers loved hearing about it, listening with a virtual storm of tongue-clicking when told of mattresses lifted on legs, of ornate chests and wardrobes, and of a superfluity of tableware.
They listened also to a description of Mycogenian customs, while Jirad Tisalver stroked his own hair complacently and made it quite obvious that he would as soon think of emasculation as of depilation. Mistress Tisalver was furious at any mention of female subservience and flatly refused to believe that the Sisters accepted it tranquilly.
They seized most, however, on Seldons. casual reference to the Imperial grounds. When, upon questioning, it turned out that Seldon had actually seen and spoken to the Emperor, a blanket of awe enveloped the family. It took a while before they dared ask questions and Seldon found that he could not satisfy them. He had not, after all, seen much of the grounds and even less of the Palace interior.
That disappointed the Tisalvers and they were unremitting in their attempts to elicit more. And, having heard of Seldons Imperial adventure, they found it hard to believe Dorss assertion that, for her part, she had never been anywhere in the Imperial grounds. Most of all, they rejected Seldons casual comment that the Emperor had talked and behaved very much as any ordinary human being would. That seemed utterly impossible to the Tisalvers. After three evenings of this, Seldon found himself tiring. He had, at first, welcomed the chance to do nothing for a while (during the day, at least) but view some of the history book-films that Dors recommended. The Tisalvers turned over their book-viewer to their guests during the day with good grace, though the little girl seemed unhappy and was sent over to a neighbors apartment to use theirs for her homework.
"It doesnt help," Seldon said restlessly in the security of his room after he had piped in some music to discourage eavesdropping. "I can see your fascination with history, but its all endless detail. Its a mountainous heap--no, a Galactic heap--of data in which I cant see the basic organization."
"I dare say," said Dors, "that there must have been a time when human beings saw no organization in the stars in the sky, but eventually they discovered the Galactic structure."
"And Im sure that took generations, not weeks. There must have been a time when physics seemed a mass of unrelated observations before the central natural laws were discovered and that took generations.--And what of the Tisalvers?"
"What of them? I think theyre being very nice."
"Theyre curious."
"Of course they are. Wouldnt you be if you were in their place?"
"But is it just curiosity? They seem to be ferociously interested in my meeting with the Emperor."
Dors seemed impatient. "Again ... its only natural. Wouldnt you be--if the situation was reversed?"
"It makes me nervous."
"Hummin brought us here."
"Yes, but hes not perfect. He brought me to the University and I was maneuvered Upperside. He brought us to Sunmaster Fourteen, who entrapped us. You know he did. Twice bitten, at least once shy. Im tired of being questioned."
"Then turn the tables, Hari. Arent you interested in Dahl?"
"Of course. What do you know about it to begin with?"
"Nothing. Its just one of more than eight hundred sectors and Ive only been on Trantor a little over two years."
"Exactly. And there are twenty-five million other worlds and Ive been on this problem only a little over two months.--I tell you. I want to go back to Helicon and take up a study of the mathematics of turbulence, which was my Ph.D. problem, and forget I ever saw--or thought I saw--that turbulence gave an insight into human society."
But that evening he said to Tisalver, "But you know, Master Tisalver, youve never told me what you do, the nature of your work."
"Me?" Tisalver placed his fingers on his chest, which was covered by the simple white T-shirt with nothing underneath, which seemed to be the standard male uniform in Dahl. "Nothing much. I work at the local holovision station in programming. Its very dull, but its a living."
"And its respectable," said Mistress Tisalver. "It means he doesnt have to work in the heatsinks."
"The heatsinks?" said Dors, lifting her light eyebrows and managing to look fascinated.
"Oh well," said Tisalver, "thats what Dahl is best known for. It isnt much, but forty billion people on Trantor need energy and we supply a lot of it. We dont get appreciated, but Id like to see some of the fancy sectors do without it."
Seldon looked confused. "Doesnt Trantor get its energy from solar power stations in orbit?"
"Some," said Tisalver, "and some from nuclear fusion stations out on the islands and some from microfusion motors and some from wind stations Upperside, but half"--he raised a finger in emphasis and his face looked unusually grave--"half comes from the heatsinks. There are heatsinks in lots of places, but none--none--as rich as those in Dahl. Are you serious that you dont know about the heatsinks? You sit there and stare at me."
Dors said quickly, "We are Outworlders, you know." (She had almost said tribespeople, but had caught herself in time.) "Especially Dr. Seldon. Hes only been on Trantor a couple of months."
"Really?" said Mistress Tisalver. She was a trifle shorter than her husband, was plump without quite being fat, had her dark hair drawn tightly back into a bun, and possessed rather beautiful dark eyes. Like her husband, she appeared to be in her thirties.
(After a period in Mycogen, not actually long in duration but intense, it struck Dors as odd to have a woman enter the conversation at will. How quickly modes and manners establish themselves, she thought, and made a mental note to mention that to Seldon--one more item for his psychohistory.) "Oh yes," she said. "Dr. Seldon is from Helicon."
Mistress Tisalver registered polite ignorance. "And where might that be?"
Dors said, "Why, its--" She turned to Seldon. "Where is it, Hari?" Seldon looked abashed. "To tell you the truth, I dont think I could locate it very easily on a Galactic model without looking up the coordinates. All I can say is that its on the other side of the central black hole from Trantor and getting there by hypership is rather a chore."
Mistress Tisalver said, "I dont think Jirad and I will ever be on a hypership."
"Someday, Casilia," said Tisalver cheerfully, "maybe we will. But tell us about Helicon, Master Seldon."
Seldon shook his head. "To me that would be dull. Its just a world, like any other. Only Trantor is different from all the rest. There are no heatsinks on Helicon--or probably anywhere else--except Trantor. Tell me about them."
("Only Trantor is different from all the rest." The sentence repeated itself in Seldons mind and for a moment he grasped at it, and for some reason Dorss hand-on-thigh story suddenly recurred to him, but Tisalver was speaking and it passed out of Seldons mind as quickly as it had entered.)
Tisalver said, "If you really want to know about heatsinks, I can show you." He turned to his wife. "Casilia, would you mind if tomorrow evening I take Master Seldon to the heatsinks."
"And me," said Dors quickly.
"And Mistress Venabili?"
Mistress Tisalver frowned and said sharply, "I dont think it would be a good idea. Our visitors would find it dull."
"I dont think so, Mistress Tisalver," said Seldon ingratiatingly. "We would very much like to see the heatsinks. We would be delighted if you would join us too ... and your little daughter--if she wants to come."
"To the heatsinks?" said Mistress Tisalver, stiffening. "Its no place at all for a decent woman."
Seldon felt embarrassed at his gaffe. "I meant no harm, Mistress Tisalver."
"No offense," said Tisalver. "Casilia thinks its beneath us and so it is, but as long as I dont work there, its no distress merely to visit and show it to guests. But it is uncomfortable and I would never get Casilia to dress properly."
They got up from their crouching positions. Dahlite "chairs" were merely molded plastic seats on small wheels and they cramped Seldons knees terribly and seemed to wiggle at his least body movement. The Tisalvers, however, had mastered the art of sitting firmly and rose without trouble and without needing to use their arms for help as Seldon had to. Dors also got up without trouble and Seldon once again marveled at her natural grace.
Before they parted to their separate rooms for the night, Seldon said to Dors, "Are you sure you know nothing about heatsinks? Mistress Tisalver makes them seem unpleasant."
"They cant be that unpleasant or Tisalver wouldnt suggest taking us on tour. Lets be content to be surprised."

Chapter 63
Tisalver said, "Youll need proper clothing." Mistress Tisalver sniffed markedly in the background.
Cautiously, Seldon, thinking of kirtles with vague distress, said, "What do you mean by proper clothing?"
"Something light, such as I wear. A T-shirt, very short sleeves, loose slacks, loose underpants, foot socks, open sandals. I have it all for you."
"Good. It doesnt sound bad."
"As for Mistress Venabili, I have the same. I hope it fits."
The clothes Tisalver supplied each of them (which were his own) fit fine--if a bit snugly. When they were ready, they bade Mistress Tisalver good-bye and she, with a resigned if still disapproving air, watched them from the doorway as they set off.
It was early evening and there was an attractive twilight glow above. It was clear that Dahls lights would soon be winking on. The temperature was mild and there were virtually no vehicles to be seen; everyone was walking. In the distance was the ever-present hum of an Expressway and the occasional glitter of its lights could be easily seen.
The Dahlites, Seldon noted, did not seem to be walking toward any particular destination. Rather, there seemed to be a promenade going on, a walking for pleasure. Perhaps, if Dahl was an impoverished sector, as Tisalver had implied, inexpensive entertainment was at a premium and what was as pleasant--and as inexpensive--as an evening stroll?
Seldon felt himself easing automatically into the gait of an aimless stroll himself and felt the warmth of friendliness all around him. People greeted each other as they passed and exchanged a few words. Black mustaches of different shape and thickness flashed everywhere and seemed a requisite for the Dahlite male, as ubiquitous as the bald heads of the Mycogenian Brothers. It was an evening rite, a way of making sure that another day had passed safely and that ones friends were still well and happy. And, it soon became apparent, Dors caught every eye. In the twilight glow, the ruddiness of her hair had deepened, but it stood out against the sea of black-haired heads (except for the occasional gray) like a gold coin winking its way across a pile of coal.
"This is very pleasant," said Seldon.
"It is," said Tisalver. "Ordinarily, Id be walking with my wife and shed be in her element. There is no one for a kilometer around whom she doesnt know by name, occupation, and interrelationships. I cant do that. Right now, half the people who greet me ... I couldnt tell you their names. But, in any case, we mustnt creep along too slowly. We must get to the elevator. Its a busy world on the lower levels."
They were on the elevator going down when Dors said, "I presume, Master Tisalver, that the heatsinks are places where the internal heat of Trantor is being used to produce steam that will turn turbines and produce electricity."
"Oh, no. Highly efficient large-scale thermopiles produce electricity directly. Dont ask me the details, please. Im just a holovision programmer. In fact, dont ask anyone the details down there. The whole thing is one big black box. It works, but no one knows how."
"What if something goes wrong?"
"It doesnt usually, but if it does, some expert comes over from somewhere. Someone who understands computers. The whole thing is highly computerized, of course."
The elevator came to a halt and they stepped out. A blast of heat struck them.
"Its hot," said Seldon quite unnecessarily.
"Yes, it is," said Tisalver. "Thats what makes Dahl so valuable as an energy source. The magma layer is nearer the surface here than it is anywhere else in the world. So you have to work in the heat."
"How about air-conditioning?" said Dors.
"There is air-conditioning, but its a matter of expense. We ventilate and dehumidify and cool, but if we go too far, then were using up too much energy and the whole process becomes too expensive."
Tisalver stopped at a door at which he signaled. It opened to a blast of cooler air and he muttered, "We ought to be able to get someone to help show us around and hell control the remarks that Mistress Venabili will otherwise be the victim of ... at least from the men."
"Remarks wont embarrass me," said Dors.
"They will embarrass me," said Tisalver.
A young man walked out of the office and introduced himself as Hano Linder. He resembled Tisalver quite closely, but Seldon decided that until he got used to the almost universal shortness, swarthiness, black hair, and luxuriant mustaches, he would not be able to see individual differences easily.
Lindor said, "Ill be glad to show you around for what there is to see. Its not one of your spectaculars, you know." He addressed them all, but his eyes were fixed on Dors. He said, "Its not going to be comfortable. I suggest we remove our shirts."
"Its nice and cool in here," said Seldon.
"Of course, but thats because were executives. Rank has its privileges. Out there we cant maintain air-conditioning at this level. Thats why they get paid more than I do. In fact, those are the best-paying jobs in Dahl, which is the only reason we get people to work down here. Even so, its getting harder to get heatsinkers all the time." He took a deep breath. "Okay, out into the soup." He removed his own shirt and tucked it into his waistband. Tisalver did the same and Seldon followed suit.
Linder glanced at Dors and said, "For your own comfort, Mistress, but its not compulsory."
"Thats all right," said Dors and removed her shirt.
Her brassiere was white, unpadded, and showed considerable cleavage. "Mistress," said Lindor, "Thats not--" He thought a moment, then shrugged and said, "All right. Well get by."
At first, Seldon was aware only of computers and machinery, huge pipes, flickering lights, and flashing screens.
The overall light was comparatively dim, though individual sections of machinery were illuminated. Seldon looked up into the almost-darkness. He said, "Why isnt it better lit?"
"Its lit well enough ... where it should be," said Lindor. His voice was well modulated and he spoke quickly, but a little harshly. "Overall illumination is kept low for psychological reasons. Too bright is translated, in the mind, into heat. Complaints go up when we turn up the lights, even when the temperature is made to go down."
Dors said, "It seems to be well computerized. I should think the operations could be turned over to computers altogether. This sort of environment is made for artificial intelligence."
"Perfectly right," said Lindor, "but neither can we take a chance on any failures. We need people on the spot if anything goes wrong. A malfunctioning computer can raise problems up to two thousand kilometers away."
"So can human error. Isnt that so?" said Seldon.
"Oh. yes, but with both people and computers on the job, computer error can be more quickly tracked down and corrected by people and, conversely, human error can be more quickly corrected by computers. What it amounts to is that nothing serious can happen unless human error and computer error take place simultaneously. And that hardly ever happens."
"Hardly ever, but not never, eh?" said Seldon. "Almost never, but not never. Computers arent what they used to be and neither are people."
"Thats the way it always seems," said Seldon, laughing slightly.
"No, no. Im not talking memory. Im not talking good old days. Im talking statistics."
At this, Seldon recalled Hummin talking of the degeneration of the times.
"See what I mean?" said Lindor, his voice dropping. "Theres a bunch of people, at the C-3 level from the looks of them, drinking. Not one of them is at his or her post."
"What are they drinking?" asked Dors.
"Special fluids for replacing electrolyte loss. Fruit juice."
"You cant blame them, can you?" said Dors indignantly. "In this dry heat, you would have to drink."
"Do you know how long a skilled C-3 can spin out a drink? And theres nothing to be done about it either. If we give them five-minute breaks for drinks and stagger them so they dont all congregate in a group, you simply stir up a rebellion."
They were approaching the group now. There were men and women (Dahl seemed to be a more or less amphisexual society) and both sexes were shirtless. The women wore devices that might be called brassieres, but they were strictly functional. They served to lift the breasts in order to improve ventilation and limit perspiration, but covered nothing.
Dors said in an aside to Seldon, "That makes sense, Hari. Im soaking wet there."
"Take off your brassiere, then," said Seldon. "I wont lift a finger to stop you."
"Somehow," said Dors, "I guessed you wouldnt." She left her brassiere where it was.
They were approaching the congregation of people--about a dozen of them.
Dors said, "If any of them make rude remarks, I shall survive."
"Thank you," said Lindor. "I cannot promise they wont.--But Ill have to introduce you. If they get the idea that you two are inspectors and in my company, theyll become unruly. Inspectors are supposed to poke around on their own without anyone from management overseeing them." He held up his arms.
"Heatsinkers, I have two introductions to make. We have visitors from outside--two Outworlders, two scholars. Theyve got worlds running short on energy and theyve come here to see how we do it here in Dahl. They think they may learn something."
"Theyll learn how to sweat!" shouted a heatsinker and there was raucous laughter.
"Shes got a sweaty chest right now," shouted a woman, "covering up like that." Dors shouted back, "Id take it off, but mine cant compete with yours."
The laughter turned good-natured.
But one young man stepped forward, staring at Seldon with intense deep-set eyes, his face set into a humorless mask. He said, "I know you. Youre the mathematician."
He ran forward, inspecting Seldons face with eager solemnity. Automatically, Dors stepped in front of Seldon and Lindor stepped in front of her, shouting, "Back, heatsinker. Mind your manners."
Seldon said, "Wait! Let him talk to me. Why is everyone piling in front of me?"
Lindor said in a low voice, "If any of them get close, youll find they dont smell like hothouse flowers."
"Ill endure it," said Seldon brusquely. "Young man, what is it you want?"
"My name is Amaryl. Yugo Amaryl. Ive seen you on holovision."
"You might have, but what about it?"
"I dont remember your name."
"You dont have to."
"You talked about something called psychohistory."
"You dont know how I wish I hadnt."
"What?"
"Nothing. What is it you want?"
"I want to talk to you. Just for a little while. Now."
Seldon looked at Lindor, who shook his head firmly. "Not while hes on his shift."
"When does your shift begin, Mr. Amaryl?" asked Seldon.
"Sixteen hundred."
"Can you see me tomorrow at fourteen hundred?"
"Sure. Where?"
Seldon turned to Tisalver. Would you permit me to see him in your place?"
Tisalver looked very unhappy. "Its not necessary. Hes just a heatsinker."
Seldon said, "He recognized my face. He knows something about me. He cant be just an anything. Ill see him in my room." And then, as Tisalvers face didnt soften, he added, "My room, for which rent is being paid. And youll be at work, out of the apartment."
Tisalver said in a low voice, "Its not me, Master Seldon. Its my wife, Casilia. She wont stand for it."
"Ill talk to her," said Seldon grimly. "Shell have to."

Chapter 64

Casilia Tisalver opened her eyes wide. "A heatsinker? Not in my apartment."
"Why not? Besides, hell be coming to my room," said Seldon. "At fourteen hundred."
"I wont have it," said Mistress Tisalver. "This is what comes of going down to the heatsinks. Jirad was a fool."
"Not at all, Mistress Tisalver. We went at my request and I was fascinated. I must see this young man, since that is necessary to my scholarly work."
"Im sorry if it is, but I wont have it."
Dors Venabili raised her hand. "Hari, let me take care of this. Mistress Tisalver, if Dr. Seldon must see someone in his room this afternoon, the additional person naturally means additional rent. We understand that. For today, then, the rent on Dr. Seldons room will be doubled."
Mistress Tisalver thought about it. "Well, thats decent of you, but its not only the credits. Theres the neighbors to think of. A sweaty, smelly heatsinker--"
"I doubt that hell be sweaty and smelly at fourteen hundred, Mistress Tisalver, but let me go on. Since Dr. Seldon must see him, then if he cant see him here, hell have to see him elsewhere, but we cant run here and there. That would be too inconvenient. Therefore, what we will have to do is to get a room elsewhere. It wont be easy and we dont want to do it, but we will have to. So we will pay the rent through today and leave and of course we will have to explain to Master Hummin why we have had to change the arrangements that he so kindly made for us."
"Wait." Mistress Tisalvers face became a study of calculation. "We wouldnt like to disoblige Master Hummin ... or you two. How long would this creature have to stay?"
"Hes coming at fourteen hundred. He must be at work at sixteen hundred. He will be here for less than two hours, perhaps considerably less. We will meet him outside, the two of us, and bring him to Dr. Seldons room. Any neighbors who see us will think he is an Outworlder friend of ours."
Mistress Tisalver nodded her head. "Then let it be as you say. Double rent for Master Seldons room for today and the heatsinker will visit just this one time."
"Just this one time," said Dors.
But later, when Seldon and Dors were sitting in her room, Dors said, "Why do you have to see him, Hari? Is interviewing a heatsinker important to psychohistory too?"
Seldon thought he detected a small edge of sarcasm in her voice and he said tartly, "I dont have to base everything on this huge project of mine, in which I have very little faith anyway. I am also a human being with human curiosities. We were down in the heatsinks for hours and you saw what the working people there were like. They were obviously uneducated. They were low-level individuals--no play on words intended--and yet here was one who recognized me. He must have seen me on holovision on the occasion of the Decennial Convention and he remembered the word psychohistory. He strikes me as unusual--as out of place somehow--and I would like to talk to him."
"Because it pleases your vanity to have become known even to heatsinkers in Dahl?"
"Well ... perhaps. But it also piques my curiosity."
"And how do you know he hasnt been briefed and intends to lead you into trouble as has happened before."
Seldon winced. "I wont let him run his fingers through my hair. In any case, were more nearly prepared now, arent we? And Im sure youll be with me. I mean, you let me go Upperside alone, you let me go with Raindrop Forty-Three to the microfarms alone, and youre not going to do that again, are you?"
"You can be absolutely sure I wont," said Dors.
"Well then, Ill talk to the young man and you can watch out for traps. I have every faith in you."

Chapter 65

Amaryl arrived a few minutes before 1400, looking warily about. His hair was neat and his thick mustache was combed and turned up slightly at the edges. His T-shirt was startlingly white. He did smell, but it was a fruity odor that undoubtedly came from the slightly overenthusiastic use of scent. He had a bag with him.
Seldon, who had been waiting outside for him, seized one elbow lightly, while Dors seized the other, and they moved rapidly into the elevator. Having reached the correct level, they passed through the apartment into Seldons room. Amaryl said in a low hangdog voice, "Nobody home, huh?"
"Everyones busy," said Seldon neutrally. He indicated the only chair in the room, a pad directly on the floor.
"No," said Amaryl. "I dont need that. One of you two use it." He squatted on the floor with a graceful downward motion.
Dors imitated the movement, sitting on the edge of Seldons floor-based mattress, but Seldon dropped down rather clumsily, having to make use of his hands and unable, quite, to find a comfortable position for his legs. Seldon said, "Well, young man, why do you want to see me?"
"Because youre a mathematician. Youre the first mathematician I ever saw--close up--so I could touch him, you know."
"Mathematicians feel like anyone else."
"Not to me, Dr. ...         Seldon?"
"Thats my name."
Amaryl looked pleased. "I finally remembered.--You see, I want to be a mathematician too."
"Very good. Whats stopping you?"
Amaryl suddenly frowned. "Are you serious?"
"I presume something is stopping you. Yes, Im serious."
"Whats stopping me is Im a Dahlite, a heatsinker on Dahl. I dont have the money to get an education and I cant get the credits to get an education. A real education, I mean. All they taught me was to read and cipher and use a computer and then I knew enough to be a heatsinker. But I wanted more  So I taught myself."
"In some ways, thats the best kind of teaching. How did you do that?"
"I knew a librarian  She was willing to help me  She was a very nice woman and she showed me how to use computers for learning mathematics. And she set up a software system that would connect me with other libraries. Id come on my days off and on mornings after my shift  Sometimes shed lock me in her private room so I wouldnt be bothered by people coming in or she would let me in when the library was closed. She didnt know mathematics herself, but she helped me all she could  She was oldish, a widow lady. Maybe she thought of me as a kind of son or something. She didnt have children of her own."
(Maybe, thought Seldon briefly, there was some other emotion involved too, but he put the thought away. None of his business.)
"I liked number theory," said Amaryl. "I worked some things out from what I learned from the computer and from the book-films it used to teach me mathematics. I came up with some new things that werent in the book-films." Seldon raised his eyebrows. "Thats interesting. Like what?"
"Ive brought some of them to you. Ive never showed them to anyone. The people around me--" He shrugged. "Theyd either laugh or be annoyed. Once I tried to tell a girl I knew, but she just said I was weird and wouldnt see me anymore  Is it all right for me to show them to you?"
"Quite all right. Believe me "
Seldon held out his hand aaaaafter a brief hesitation, Amaryl handed him the bag he was carrying.
For a long time, Seldon looked over Amaryls papers. The work was naive in the extreme, but he allowed no smile to cross his face  He followed the demonstrations, not one of which was new, of course--or even nearly new--or of any importance.
But that didnt matter.
Seldon looked up. "Did you do all of this yourself?"
Amaryl, looking more than half-frightened, nodded his head. Seldon extracted several sheets. "What made you think of this?" His finger ran down a line of mathematical reasoning.
Amaryl looked it over, frowned, and thought about it  Then he explained his line of thinking.
Seldon listened and said, "Did you ever read a book by Anat Bigell?"
"On number theory?"
"The title was Mathematical Deduction. It wasnt about number theory, particularly."
Amaryl shook his head. "I never heard of him. Im sorry."
"He worked out this theorem of yours three hundred years ago.
Amaryl looked stricken. "I didnt know that."
"Im sure you didnt. You did it more cleverly, though. Its not rigorous, but--"
"What do you mean, rigorous?"
"It doesnt matter." Seldon put the papers back together in a sheaf, restored it to the bag, and said, "Make several copies of all this. Take one copy, have it dated by an official computer, and place it under computerized seal. My friend here, Mistress Venabili, can get you into Streeling University without tuition on some sort of scholarship. Youll have to start at the beginning and take courses in other subjects than mathematics, but--"
By now Amaryl had caught his breath. "Into Streeling University? They wont take me "
"Why not? Dors, you can arrange it, cant you?"
"Im sure I can."
"No, you cant," said Amaryl hotly. "They wont take me  Im from Dahl "
"Well?"
"They wont take people from Dahl "
Seldon looked at Dors. "Whats he talking about?"
Dors shook her head. "I really dont know."
Amaryl said, "Youre an Outworlder, Mistress  How long have you been at Streeling?"
"A little over two years, Mr. Amaryl."
"Have you ever seen Dahlites there--short, curly black hair, big mustaches?"
"There are students with all kinds of appearances."
"But no Dahlites. Look again the next time youre there."
"Why not?" said Seldon.
"They dont like us. We look different. They dont like our mustaches."
"You can shave your--" but Seldons voice died under the others furious glance.
"Never. Why should I? My mustache is my manhood."
"You shave your beard. Thats your manhood too."
"To my people it is the mustache."
Seldon looked at Dors again and murmured, "Bald heads, mustaches ... madness."
"What?" said Amaryl angrily.
"Nothing. Tell me what else they dont like about Dahlites."
"They make up things not to like. They say we smell. They say were dirty. They say we steal. They say were violent. They say were dumb."
"Why do they say all this?"
"Because its easy to say it and it makes them feel good. Sure, if we work in the heatsinks, we get dirty and smelly. If were poor and held down, some of us steal and get violent. But that isnt the way it is with all of us. How about those tall yellow-hairs in the Imperial Sector who think they own the Galaxy--no, they do own the Galaxy. Dont they ever get violent? Dont they steal sometimes? If they did my job, theyd smell the way I do. If they had to live the way I have to, theyd get dirty too."
"Who denies that there are people of all kinds in all places?" said Seldon.
"No one argues the matter! They just take it for granted. Master Seldon, Ive got to get away from Trantor. I have no chance on Trantor, no way of earning credits, no way of getting an education, no way of becoming a mathematician, no way of becoming any thing but what they say I am ... a worthless nothing." This last was said in frustration--and desperation.
Seldon tried to be reasonable. "The person Im renting this room from is a Dahlite. He has a clean job. Hes educated."
"Oh sure," said Amaryl passionately. "There are some. They let a few do it so that they can say it can be done. And those few can live nicely as long as they stay in Dahl. Let them go outside and theyll see how theyre treated. And while theyre in here they make themselves feel good by treating the rest of us like dirt. That makes them yellow-hairs in their own eyes. What did this nice person youre renting this room from say when you told him you were bringing in a heatsinker? What did he say I would be like? Theyre gone now ... wouldnt be in the same place with me."
Seldon moistened his lips. "I wont forget you. Ill see to it that youll get off Trantor and into my own University in Helicon--once Im back there myself."
"Do you promise that? Your word of honor? Even though Im a Dahlite?"
"The fact that youre a Dahlite is unimportant to me. The fact that you are already a mathematician is! But I still cant quite grasp what youre telling me. I find it impossible to believe that there would be such unreasoning feeling against harmless people."
Amaryl said bitterly, "Thats because youve never had any occasion to interest yourself in such things. It can all pass right under your nose and you wouldnt smell a thing because it doesnt affect you. " Dors said, "Mr. Amaryl, Dr. Seldon is a mathematician like you and his head can sometimes be in the clouds. You must understand that. I am a historian, however. I know that it isnt unusual to have one group of people look down upon another group. There are peculiar and almost ritualistic hatreds that have no rational justification and that can have their serious historical influence. Its too bad."
Amaryl said, "Saying something is too bad is easy. You say you disapprove, which makes you a nice person, and then you can go about your own business and not be interested anymore. Its a lot worse than too bad. Its against everything decent and natural. Were all of us the same, yellow-hairs and black-hairs, tall and short, Easterners, Westerners, Southerners, and Outworlders. Were all of us, you and I and even the Emperor, descended from the people of Earth, arent we?"
"Descended from what?" asked Seldon. He turned to look at Dors, his eyes wide.
"From the people of Earth!" shouted Amaryl. "The one planet on which human beings originated."
"One planet? Just one planet?"
"The only planet. Sure. Earth."
"When you say Earth, you mean Aurora, dont you?"
"Aurora? Whats that?--I mean Earth. Have you never heard of Earth?"
"No," said Seldon. "Actually not."
"Its a mythical world," began Dors, "that--"
"Its not mythical. It was a real planet."
Seldon sighed. "Ive heard this all before. Well, lets go through it again. Is there a Dahlite book that tells of Earth?"
"What?"
"Some computer software, then?"
"I dont know what youre talking about."
"Young man, where did you hear about Earth?"
"My dad told me. Everyone knows about it."
"Is there anyone who knows about it especially? Did they teach you about it in school?"
"They never said a word about it there."
"Then how do people know about it?"
Amaryl shrugged his shoulders with an air of being uselessly badgered over nothing. "Everyone just does. If you want stories about it, theres Mother Rittah. I havent heard that shes died yet."
"Your mother? Wouldnt you know--"
"Shes not my mother. Thats just what they call her. Mother Rittah. Shes an old woman. She lives in Billibotton. Or used to."
"Wheres that?"
"Down in that direction," said Amaryl, gesturing vaguely.
"How do I get there?"
"Get there? You dont want to get there. Youd never come back."
"Why not?"
"Believe me. You dont want to go there."
"But Id like to see Mother Rittah."
Amaryl shook his head. "Can you use a knife?"
"For what purpose? What kind of knife?"
"A cutting knife. Like this." Amaryl reached down to the belt that held his pants tight about his waist. A section of it came away and from one end there flashed out a knife blade, thin, gleaming, and deadly. Dorss hand immediately came down hard upon his right wrist. Amaryl laughed. "I wasnt planning to use it. I was just showing it to you." He put the knife back in his belt. "You need one in self-defense and if you dont have one or if you have one but dont know how to use it, youll never get out of Billibotton alive. Anyway"--he suddenly grew very grave and intent--"are you really serious, Master Seldon, about helping me get to Helicon?"
"Entirely serious. Thats a promise. Write down your name and where you can be reached by hypercomputer. You have a code, I suppose."
"My shift in the heatsinks has one. Will that do?"
"Yes."
"Well then," said Amaryl, looking up earnestly at Seldon, "this means I have my whole future riding on you, Master Seldon, so please dont go to Billibotton. I cant afford to lose you now."
He turned beseeching eyes on Dors and said softly, "Mistress Venabili, if hell listen to you, dont let him go. Please."
Billibotton
DAHL-- ... Oddly enough, the best-known aspect of this sector is Billibotton, a semi-legendary place about which innumerable tales have grown up. In fact, a whole branch of literature now exists in which heroes and adventurers (and victims) must dare the dangers of passing through Billibotton. So stylized have these stories become that the one well-known and, presumably, authentic tale involving such a passage, that of Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili, has come to seem fantastic simply by association ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

pter 66

When Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili were alone, Dors asked thoughtfully, "Are you really planning to see this Mother woman?"
"Im thinking about it, Dors."
"Youre an odd one, Hari. You seem to go steadily from bad to worse. You went Upperside, which seemed harmless enough, for a rational purpose when you were in Streeling. Then, in Mycogen, you broke into the Elders aerie, a much more dangerous task, for a much more foolish purpose. And now in Dahl, you want to go to this place, which that young man seems to think is simple suicide, for something altogether nonsensical."
"Im curious about this reference to Earth--and must know if theres anything to it."
Dors said, "Its a legend and not even an interesting one. It is routine. The names differ from planet to planet, but the content is the same. There is always the tale of an original world and a golden age. There is a longing for a supposedly simple and virtuous past that is almost universal among the people of a complex and vicious society. In one way or another, this is true of all societies, since everyone imagines his or her own society to be too complex and vicious, however simple it may be. Mark that down for your psychohistory."
"Just the same," said Seldon, "I have to consider the possibility that one world did once exist. Aurora ... Earth ... the name doesnt matter. In fact--"
He paused and finally Dors said, "Well?"
Seldon shook his head. "Do you remember the hand-on-thigh story you told me in Mycogen? It was right after I got the Book from Raindrop Forty-Three ... Well, it popped into my head one evening recently when we were talking to the Tisalvers. I said something that reminded me, for an instant--"
"Reminded you of what?"
"I dont remember. It came into my head and went out again, but somehow every time I think of the single-world notion, it seems to me I have the tips of my fingers on something and then lose it."
Dors looked at Seldon in surprise. "I dont see what it could be. The hand-on-thigh story has nothing to do with Earth or Aurora."
"I know, but this ... thing ... that hovers just past the edge of my mind seems to be connected with this single world anyway and I have the feeling that I must find out more about it at any cost. That ... and robots."
"Robots too? I thought the Elders aerie put an end to that."
"Not at all. Ive been thinking about them." He stared at Dors with a troubled look on his face for a long moment, then said, "But Im not sure."
"Sure about what, Hari?"
But Seldon merely shook his head and said nothing more.
Dors frowned, then said, "Hari, let me tell you one thing. In sober history--and, believe me, I know what Im talking about there is no mention of one world of origin. Its a popular belief, I admit. I dont mean just among the unsophisticated followers of folklore, like the Mycogenians and the Dahlite heatsinkers, but there are biologists who insist that there must have been one world of origin for reasons that are well outside my area of expertise and there are the more mystical historians who tend to speculate about it. And among the leisure-class intellectuals, I understand such speculations are becoming fashionable. Still, scholarly history knows nothing about it."
Seldon said, "All the more reason, perhaps, to go beyond scholarly history. All I want is a device that will simplify psychohistory for me and I dont care what the device is, whether it is a mathematical trick or a historical trick or something totally imaginary. If the young man weve just talked to had had a little more formal training, Id have set him on the problem. His thinking is marked by considerable ingenuity and originality--"
Dors said, "And youre really going to help him, then?"
"Absolutely. Just as soon as Im in a position to."
"But ought you to make promises youre not sure youll be able to keep?"
"I want to keep it. If youre that stiff about impossible promises, consider that Hummin told Sunmaster Fourteen that Id use psychohistory to get the Mycogenians their world back. Theres just about zero chance of that. Even if I work out psychohistory, who knows if it can be used for so narrow and specialized a purpose? Theres a real case of promising what one cant deliver."
But Dors said with some heat, "Chetter Hummin was trying to save our lives, to keep us out of the hands of Demerzel and the Emperor. Dont forget that. And I think he really would like to help the Mycogenians."
"And I really would like to help Yugo Amaryl and I am far more likely to be able to help him than I am the Mycogenians, so if you justify the second, please dont criticize the first. Whats more, Dors"--and his eyes flashed angrily--"I really would like to find Mother Rittah and Im prepared to go alone.""Never!" snapped Dors. "If you go, I go."
第六十六章
