
Book
HAND-ON-THIGH STORY-- ... An occasion cited by Hari Seldon as the first turning point in his search for a method to develop psychohistory. Unfortunately, his published writings give no indication as to what that "story" was and speculations concerning it (there have been many) are futile. It remains one of the many intriguing mysteries concerning Seldons career.
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第四十四章
　　谢顿说：“我来自一个露天的世界，姐妹，除了川陀之外，其他世界也都是那样。雨水时有时无；河水不是太少就是泛滥；温度不是太高就是太低，这就代表收成有好有坏。然而在此地，环境完全受到控制，收成想不好也不行。麦曲生多么幸运啊。”
他开始等待。她的回答有各种可能，而他的行动方针将视她如何回答而定。
现在她说话的态度已经相当自在，而且似乎对他这位男性不再有任何提防，所以这趟长途旅程的目的业已达到。
雨点四三说：“环境也不是那么容易控制，偶尔会有病毒感染，有时也会有意料之外的不良突变。还有一些时候，大批作物会整个枯萎或变得毫无价值。”
“真令人难以置信，遇到这种情况你们会怎么处理？”
“通常都没什么办法，只能将腐坏的部分尽数销毁，甚至包括那些只是有可能腐坏的。盘子和水槽一定要完全消毒，有时必须全部丢弃。”
“那么，这等于是一种外科手术，”谢顿说，“将染病的组织切除。”
“没错。”
“你们如何预防这些情况发生？”
“我们能怎么办？我们不停地进行测试，看看有没有可能发生突变，有没有可能出现新的病毒，有没有意外的污染或环境的变化。我们很少会探测到什么问题，不过一旦发现了，我们就立即采取非常措施。如此一来，歉收的年份很少，而且即使歉收，也只是对部分地区稍有影响。历史上收成最差的一年，只比平均年产量少了百分之十二，不过那还是足以造成困扰。问题是，即使是最周密的深谋远虑，以及设计得最高明的计算机程序，也无法百分之百预测本质上不可预测的事物。”
（谢顿觉得一阵战栗小由自主传遍全身，因为她说的仿佛就是心理史学——事实上，她不过是在说极少数人所经营的微生农场。而他自己，却是从各个角度在考虑这个庞大的银河帝国。）
这使他无可避免地感到气馁，他说：“当然，并非全然不可预测，有些力量在引导、在照顾我们大家。”
雨点四三突然僵住。她转头望向谢顿，炯炯目光似乎想要将他穿透。
但她只是说：“什么？”
谢顿觉得坐立不安：“在我的感觉中，谈到病毒和突变这些话题时，我们只是在讨论自然界的事物，讨论服从自然律的各种现象。我们并未考虑到超自然，对不对？并没有包括不受制于自然律，进而能控制自然律的力量。”
她继续盯着他，仿佛他突然改说某种陌生的、不为人知的银河标准语方言。她又说了一句：“什么？”这次的音量近乎耳语。
他结结巴巴地用一些自己不太熟悉，以致令他有几分尴尬的词汇说：“你们必须求助某种伟大的本体，某种伟大的圣灵，某种……我不知道该管它叫什么。”
雨点四三的音调陡地拔高，但是音量仍旧压得很低：“我就知道，我就知道你是那个意思，可是我本来不敢相信。你是在指控我们拥有宗教。你为什么不那么说？为什么不用那个词汇？”
她在等待一个答案。谢顿被她一顿抢白弄得有点不知所措，他说：“因为那不是我使用的词汇，我管它叫超自然论。”
“随便你怎么称呼，那就是宗教，我们没有这种东西。宗教是外族人才有的，是那群渣……”
这位姐妹突然住口，吞了一下口水，仿佛差点就要呛死。谢顿可以确定，将她呛到的那个词一定是“渣滓”。
她再度恢复自制，以低于她平常的女高音音调缓缓说道“我们不是一个信仰宗教的民族，我们的国度是这个银河，而且一向如此。如果你信仰宗教……”
谢顿感到自己被困住了，他完全没料到会有这种情形。他举起一只手，做出辩解的手势：“不是这样的。我是个数学家，我的国度也是这个银河。只不过我根据你们那些刻板的习俗，猜想你们的国度……”
“别那样想，外族男子。如果我们的习俗刻板，那是因为我们只有几百万人，被四周几十亿人包围起来。我们总得设法表现得与众不同，这样一来，我们这些珍贵的少数，才不会被你们满坑满谷的多数吞没。我们必须靠我们的脱毛、我们的衣着、我们的行为、我们的生活方式来和他人区隔。我们必须知道自己是什么人，也必须确保你们外族人知道我们是什么人。我们在农场中辛勤工作，好让你们对我们刮目相看，这样才能确保你们放我们一马。这就是我们对你们唯一的要求——放我们一马。”
“我没有伤害你或是你们任何族人的意图。我只是来这里寻求知识，就像在其他地方一样。”
“你却借着询问我们的宗教来侮辱我们，仿佛我们曾经仰赖一种神秘、虚无的圣灵，帮助我们做到自己无法做到的事。”
“有许多人、许多世界都相信某种形式的超自然论或者蜕——宗教，如果你比较喜欢这个词的话。我们或许会因为某种理由而不同意他们的见解，但我们的不同意也有可能是个错误，双方犯错的机率刚好一半一半。无论如何，信仰没什么可耻，我的问题也不是打算侮辱任何人。”
可是她没有妥协的意思：“宗教！”她气呼呼地说，“我们根本不需要。”
在这段对话中，谢顿的心不断往下沉，此时已经跌到谷底。整件事情，与雨点四三的这趟远征，最后竟然一无所获。
不料她又继续开口说：“我们另有好得多的东西，我们有历史。”
谢顿的情绪立刻上扬，露出了微笑。
Chapter 45

Raindrop Forty-Three stared at Seldon, wild-eyed and breathing heavily. "I cant stay here," she said.
Seldon looked about. "No one is bothering us. Even the Brother from whom we got the dainties said nothing about us. He seemed to take us as a perfectly normal pair."
"Thats because there is nothing unusual about us--when the light is dim, when you keep your voice low so the tribesman accent is less noticeable, and when I seem calm. But now--" Her voice was growing hoarse.
"What of now?"
"I am nervous and tense. I am ... in a perspiration."
"Who is to notice? Relax. Calm down."
"I cant relax here. I cant calm down while I may be noticed."
"Where are we to go, then?"
"There are little sheds for resting. I have worked here. I know about them."
She was walking rapidly now and Seldon followed. Up a small ramp, which he would not have noticed in the twilight without her, there was a line of doors, well spread apart.
"The one at the end," she muttered. "If its free."
It was unoccupied. A small glowing rectangle said NOT IN USE and the door was ajar.
Raindrop Forty-Three looked about rapidly, motioned Seldon in, then stepped inside herself. She closed the door and, as she did so, a small ceiling light brightened the interior.
Seldon said, "Is there any way the sign on the door can indicate this shed is in use?"
"That happened automatically when the door closed and the light went on," said the Sister.
Seldon could feel air softly circulating with a small sighing sound, but where on Trantor was that ever-present sound and feel not apparent? The room was not large, but it had a cot with a firm, efficient mattress, and what were obviously clean sheets. There was a chair and table, a small refrigerator, and something that looked like an enclosed hot plate, probably a tiny food-heater.
Raindrop Forty-Three sat down on the chair, sitting stiffly upright, visibly attempting to force herself into relaxation.
Seldon, uncertain as to what he ought to do, remained standing till she gestured--a bit impatiently--for him to sit on the cot. He did so.
Raindrop Forty-Three said softly, as though talking to herself, "If it is ever known that I have been here with a man--even if only a tribesman--I shall indeed be an outcast."
Seldon rose quickly. "Then lets not stay here."
"Sit down. I cant go out when Im in this mood. Youve been asking about religion. What are you after?"
It seemed to Seldon that she had changed completely. Gone was the passivity, the subservience. There was none of the shyness, the backwardness in the presence of a male. She was glaring at him through narrowed eyes.
"I told you. Knowledge. Im a scholar. It is my profession and my desire to know, I want to understand people in particular, so I want to learn history. For many worlds, the ancient historical records--the truly ancient historical records--have decayed into myths and legends, often becoming part of a set of religious beliefs or of supernaturalism. But if Mycogen does not have a religion, then--"
"I said we have history."
Seldon said, "Twice youve said you have history. How old?"
"It goes back twenty thousand years."
"Truly? Let us speak frankly. Is it real history or is it something that has degenerated into legend?"
"It is real history, of course."
Seldon was on the point of asking how she could tell, but thought better of it. Was there really a chance that history might reach back twenty thousand years and be authentic? He was not a historian himself, so he would have to check with Dors.
But it seemed so likely to him that on every world the earliest histories were medleys of self-serving heroisms and minidramas that were meant as morality plays and were not to be taken literally. It was surely true of Helicon, yet you would find scarcely a Heliconian who would not swear by all the tales told and insist it was all true history. They would support, as such, even that perfectly ridiculous tale of the first exploration of Helicon and the encounters with large and dangerous flying reptiles--even though nothing like flying reptiles had been found to be native to any world explored and settled by human beings.
He said instead, "How does this history begin?"
There was a faraway look in the Sisters eyes, a look that did not focus on Seldon or on anything in the room. She said, "It begins with a world--our world. One world."
"One world?" (Seldon remembered that Hummin had spoken of legends of a single, original world of humanity.)
"One world. There were others later, but ours was the first. One world, with space, with open air, with room for everyone, with fertile fields, with friendly homes, with warm people. For thousands of years we lived there and then we had to leave and skulk in one place or another until some of us found a corner of Trantor where we learned to grow food that brought us a little freedom. And here in Mycogen, we now have our own ways--and our own dreams."
"And your histories give the full details concerning the original world? The one world?"
"Oh yes, it is all in a book and we all have it. Every one of us. We carry it at all times so that there is never a moment when any one of us cannot open it and read it and remember who we are and who we were and resolve that someday we will have our world back."
"Do you know where this world is and who lives on it now?"
Raindrop Forty-Three hesitated, then shook her head fiercely. "We do not, but someday we will find it."
"And you have this book in your possession now?"
"Of course."
"May I see that book?"
Now a slow smile crossed the face of the Sister. She said, "So thats what you want. I knew you wanted something when you asked to be guided through the microfarms by me alone." She seemed a little embarrassed. "I didnt think it was the Book."
"It is all I want," said Seldon earnestly. "I really did not have my mind on anything else. If you brought me here because you thought--"
She did not allow him to finish. "But here we are. Do you or dont you want the Book?"
"Are you offering to let me see it?"
"On one condition."
Seldon paused, weighing the possibility of serious trouble if he had overcome the Sisters inhibitions to a greater extent than he had ever intended. "What condition?" he said.
Raindrop Forty-Threes tongue emerged lightly and licked quickly at her lips. Then she said with a distinct tremor in her voice, "That you remove your skincap."
第四十五章
第十部 典籍
毛手毛脚的故事：……哈里•谢顿曾经提到，这是他找寻心理史学发展方法中的第一个转折点。
不幸的是，他所发表的著作皆未指出那究竟是什么“故事”，各种臆测（为数众多）则全是捕风捉影。它一直是有关谢顿生平许多有趣的谜之一。
——《银河百科全书）


第四十五章
雨点四三瞪着谢顿，眼睛睁得老大，呼吸十分沉重。
“我不能留在这里。”她说。
谢顿四下望了望。“没有人会打扰我们，就连那个给我们美食的兄弟也没说我们什么，他似乎将我们当成一对完全普通的夫妻。”
“那是因为我们没有任何不寻常的地方——当时光线暗淡；当时你压低声音使外族口音不太明显；还有当时我表现得很冷静。可是现在……”她的声音开始变得嘶哑。
“现在怎么样？”
“我既焦虑又紧张，我在……流汗。”
“谁会注意到呢？放轻松，冷静下来。”
“我在这罩不能放轻松。当我可能引起注意时，我无法冷静下来。”
“那么，我们能到哪儿去？”
“附近有些供人休憩的小屋。我曾在这里工作，我知道。”
她快步向前走，谢顿紧跟在后。他们爬上一个小坡道，若是没有她带路，在昏黄的光线下，他不可能会注意到这条小路。在坡道之上，有一长列相互间隔很远的门。
“最后那一间，”她低声说道，“如果没人的话。”
那间果然是空的。一个发亮的矩形小板映出“无人使用”几个字，而且门只是微掩着。
雨点四三迅速四下张望，示意谢顿进去，接着自己也走了进来。当她关上门的时候，屋顶的一盏小灯瞬即照亮斗室。
谢顿说：“有没有办法让门上标志显示有人使用这间小屋？”
“门一关上灯就会亮，标志也会自动切换。”雨点四三说。
谢顿可以感到空气在轻柔地循环，还带着一种微弱的风声。然而在川陀上，哪里又听不到、觉不着这种永不止息的声音呢？
这个房间并不大，却摆了一张具有硬实床垫的便床，上面的床单显然相当清洁。此外还有一把椅子、一张桌子、一台小型冰箱，以及看来像是密封热板的东西，那或许是个小型食物加热器。
雨点四三坐到椅子上，将上身挺得笔直，显然在企图强迫自己放松。
谢顿不知道该坐哪里，只好继续站着。直到她有点不耐烦地做了个手势，他才顺从地坐到便床上。
雨点四三仿佛自言自语般轻声说道：“如果有人知道我曾和一名男子关在这里．即使只是个外族男子，我也注定将被驱逐出境。”
谢顿急忙站起来：“那我们别待在这里。”
“坐下，我在这种心情之下不能出去。刚才你一直在问有关宗教的事，你究竟在找什么？”
谢顿觉得她完全变了一个人，被动与顺从都已消失无踪。面对一名男性她不再害羞，也不再畏缩不前。此时，她正眯起眼睛瞪着他。
“我告诉过你，我寻找的是知识。我是一名学者，追求知识是我的专业和渴望。我尤其想要了解人，所以我想学习历史。在许多世界上，古代历史记录——真正的古代历史记录，都已变质为神话和传说，多半成了宗教信仰或超自然论的一部分。但麦曲生如果没有宗教，那么……”
“我说过我们有历史。”
谢顿说：“你说了两次你们拥有历史，它有多古老？”
“上溯至两万年前。”
“真的吗？让我们坦白说吧，它究竟是真实的历史，还是已经退化成传说的东西？”
“当然是真实的历史。”
谢顿正想问她如何能判断，却临时打消了这个念头。历史真有可能上溯两万年而仍旧真实可信吗？他自己不是历史学家，所以必须问问铎丝。
可是他有一种强烈的感觉，那就是在每个世界上，最早期的历史都是一堆大杂烩，充满了说教式的英雄事迹与迷你剧本，只可视为一种道德剧，不能太过当真。赫利肯的情形当然如此，但你很难找到一个不深信那些传说、不坚持它们全是真实历史的赫利肯人。他们就连完全荒诞的故事照样深信不误，例如人类在首次探勘赫利肯时，遇到危险的巨型飞行爬虫——虽然在人类曾探勘与殖民的所有世界上，都从未发现任何土生土长的、类似飞行爬虫的动物。
不过他只是问：“这个历史是如何开始的？”
雨点四三双眼露出恍惚的目光，并未聚焦在谢顿或小屋中任何一样东西上。她说：“它开始于某个世界，我们的世界，唯一的世界。”
“唯一的世界？”（谢顿想起夫铭提过有关人类起源于单一世界的传说。）
“唯一的世界。后来又有了其他世界，但我们的世界是第一个。唯一的世界，上面有生存的空间，有露天的空气，万物皆享有一席之地，有肥沃的田园，有友善的人家，有热情的人们。前后数千年的时间，我们一直住在那里，后来我们不得不离开，开始四处东躲西藏，直到一些人在川陀的一角找到容身之地。我们在此学会栽种食粮，为我们带来了一点自由。而在麦曲生这里，我们现在拥有自己的生活方式——以及我们自己的梦想。”
“你们的历史详细记载了那个起源世界？那个唯一的世界？”
“喔，没错，全部记在一本书里。这本书大家都有，我们每一个人都有。我们随时随地随身携带，这样一来，任何人时时刻刻都能翻阅，以便牢记我们现在是什么人、过去是什么人，并且下定决心，总有一天会收复我们的世界。”
“你知道这个世界在哪里，现在上面住着什么人吗？”
雨点四三迟疑了一下，然后猛力摇了摇头：“我们不知道，但总有一天我们会找到答案。”
“你现在就带着这本书吗？”
“当然。”
“我可以看看吗？”
雨点四三的脸上缓缓掠过一阵笑容：“所以那就是你要的，”她说，“当你要求由我独自带你参观微生农场时，我就知道你在打什么东西的主意。”她似乎有点尴尬，“但我没想到是为了这本典籍：”
“这是我唯一想要的，”谢顿一本正经地说，“我心里真的没打别的主意。如果你带我到这里来，是由于你以为……”
她没让他把话说完：“可是我们已经来到这里，你到底是想还是不想要这本典籍？”
“你愿意让我看吗？”
“有一个条件。”
谢顿愣了一下。若是自己将这位姐妹的心理防线解除得过了头，他就得衡量导致严重后果的可能性。“什么条件？”他问。
雨点四三将舌头轻轻伸出来，迅速舔了一下嘴唇。然后，她以带着明显战粟的声音说：“你得脱掉你的人皮帽。”

Chapter 46

Hari Seldon stared blankly at Raindrop Forty-Three. There was a perceptible moment in which he did not know what she was talking about. He had forgotten he was wearing a skincap.
Then he put his hand to his head and, for the first time, consciously felt the skincap he was wearing. It was smooth, but he felt the tiny resilience of the hair beneath. Not much. His hair, after all, was fine and without much body. He said, still feeling it, "Why?"
She said, "Because I want you to. Because thats the condition if you want to see the Book."
He said, "Well, if you really want me to." His hand probed for the edge, so that he could peel it off.
But she said, "No, let me do it. Ill do it." She was looking at him hungrily.
Seldon dropped his hands to his lap. "Go ahead, then."
The Sister rose quickly and sat down next to him on the cot. Slowly, carefully, she detached the skincap from his head just in front of his ear. Again she licked her lips and she was panting as she loosened the skincap about his forehead and turned it up. Then it came away and was gone and Seldons hair, released, seemed to stir a bit in glad freedom.
He said, troubled, "Keeping my hair under the skincap has probably made my scalp sweat. If so, my hair will be rather damp."
He raised his hand, as though to check the matter, but she caught it and held it back. "I want to do that," she said. "Its part of the condition." Her fingers, slowly and hesitantly, touched his hair and then withdrew. She touched it again and, very gently, stroked it. "Its dry," she said. "It feels ... good."
"Have you ever felt cephalic hair before?"
"Only on children sometimes. This ... is different." She was stroking again.
"In what way?" Seldon, even amid his embarrassment, found it possible to be curious.
"I cant say. Its just ... different."
After a while he said, "Have you had enough?"
"No. Dont rush me. Can you make it lie anyway you want it to?"
"Not really. It has a natural way of falling, but I need a comb for that and I dont have one with me."
"A comb?"
"An object with prongs ... uh, like a fork ... but the prongs are more numerous and somewhat softer."
"Can you use your fingers?" She was running hers through his hair.
He said, "After a fashion. It doesnt work very well."
"Its bristly behind."
"The hair is shorter there."
Raindrop Forty-Three seemed to recall something. "The eyebrows," she said. "Isnt that what theyre called?" She stripped off the shields, then ran her fingers through the gentle arc of hair, against the grain. "Thats nice," she said, then laughed in a high-pitched way that was almost like her younger sisters giggle. "Theyre cute."
Seldon said a little impatiently, "Is there anything else thats part of the condition?"
In the rather dim light, Raindrop Forty-Three looked as though she might be considering an affirmative, but said nothing. Instead, she suddenly withdrew her hands and lifted them to her nose. Seldon wondered what she might be smelling. "How odd," she said. "May I ... may I do it again another time?"
Seldon said uneasily, "If you will let me have the Book long enough to study it, then perhaps."
Raindrop Forty-Three reached into her kirtle through a slit that Seldon had not noticed before and, from some hidden inner pocket, removed a book bound in some tough, flexible material. He took it, trying to control his excitement. While Seldon readjusted his skincap to cover his hair, Raindrop Forty-Three raised her hands to her nose again and then, gently and quickly, licked one finger.
第四十六章
　　哈里•谢顿茫然地凝视着雨点四三。有好一会儿，他根本不明白她究竟在说什么，因为他忘记自己戴着一顶人皮帽。
然后，他将一只手放到头上，才意识到自己戴着那顶帽子。它的表面光滑，但他能感觉到下面头发产生的轻微弹性。那并不太明显，毕竟他的发质纤细，而且不怎么浓密。
他一面摸着头，一面说：“为什么？”
“因为我要你这么做；因为如果你想看典籍，这就是交换条件。”
他说：“好吧，如果你真要我这么做。”他开始动手摸索帽缘，准备将人皮帽剥掉。
但她却说：“不，让我来，我来帮你脱。”她以渴盼的眼神望着他。
谢顿将双手放在膝盖上：“那就来吧。”
这位姐妹迅速起身，跟他并排坐到便床上。她慢慢地、仔细地将他耳前的人皮帽撕开，同时又舔了舔嘴唇。当她将他的前额部分弄松，并将人皮帽向上掀的时候，她开始大口喘气。然后人皮帽便被摘下，谢顿的头发在解除束缚之后，似乎因为欣庆而微微抖动了一下。
他不安地说道：“我的头发一直闷在人皮帽下面，也许会使我的头皮出汗。要是这样的话，我的头发就会有点潮湿。”
他举起一只手，好像是要检查一下。她却将他的手抓住，并且将它拉开。“我来做这件事，”她说，“这是条件的一部分。”
她的手指缓缓地、迟疑地触到他的头发，又赶紧缩回去。然后，她再次伸出手，并以非常轻柔的动作抚摸着。
“是干的，”她说．“摸起来感觉……很好。”
“你以前曾摸过头部毛发吗？”
“偶尔，不过都是小孩子的，这个……不一样。”她再度开始抚摸。
“哪里不一样？”即使处于这种尴尬情境中，谢顿的好奇心仍毫不退让。
“我说不出来，就是……不一样。”　过了一会儿，他问：“你摸够了吗？”
“没有，别催我。你能随心所欲让它们朝任何方向趴下吗？”
“并不尽然，它们有个自然的服帖的方向。我需要一把梳子才行，而我身上并没有。”
“梳子？”
“一种具有好些分叉的东西……啊，就像一把叉子……但是分叉多得多，而且多少柔软些。”
“能用手指吗？”她一面说，一面用她的手指梳过他的头发。
他说：“马马虎虎，效果不是很好。”
“后面的硬一点。”
“那里的头发比较短。”
雨点四三似乎想起什么事：“眉毛，”她说，“是这样叫的吗？”她摘下那两条遮带，手指沿着眉毛构成的轻微弧度逆向抚过。
“感觉很好。”说完她发出了一阵高亢的笑声，几乎可以跟她妹妹的笑声媲美。“真可爱。”
谢顿不太耐烦地说：“这个条件还有没有包含其他部分？”
在相当暗淡的光线下，雨点四三仿佛在考虑一个肯定的回答，但她什么也没说。反之，她突然缩回手去，再将双手举到鼻尖。谢顿纳闷她究竟想闻些什么。
“多么奇特，”她说，“我可以……可以改天再来一次吗？”
谢顿硬着头皮答道：“如果你将典籍多借我几天，让我有充分的时间研究，那么或许可以。”
雨点四三将手伸进裰服的一个隙缝，谢顿过去从未注意到它的存在。她从一隐藏式内袋中，取出一本由某种又硬又韧的质料装订封面的书。
谢顿接了过来，尽量控制住内心的兴奋。
当谢顿调整人皮帽，将头发重新遮起之际，雨点四三再度把双手举到鼻尖，接着又伸出舌头，很轻、很快地舔了下指头。
Chapter 47

"Felt your hair?" said Dors Venabili. She looked at Seldons hair as though she was of a mind to feel it herself.
Seldon moved away slightly. "Please dont. The woman made it seem like a perversion."
"I suppose it was--from her standpoint. Did you derive no pleasure from it yourself?"
"Pleasure? It gave me gooseflesh. When she finally stopped, I was able to breathe again. I kept thinking: What other conditions will she make?"
Dors laughed. "Were you afraid that she would force sex upon you? Or hopeful?"
"I assure you I didnt dare think. I just wanted the Book."
They were in their room now and Dors turned on her field distorter to make sure they would not be overheard.
The Mycogenian night was about to begin. Seldon had removed his skincap and kirtle and had bathed, paying particular attention to his hair, which he had foamed and rinsed twice. He was now sitting on his cot, wearing a light nightgown that had been hanging in the closet.
Dors said, eyes dancing, "Did she know you have hair on your chest?"
"I was hoping earnestly she wouldnt think of that."
"Poor Hari. It was all perfectly natural, you know. I would probably have had similar trouble if I was alone with a Brother. Worse, Im sure, since he would believe--Mycogenian society being what it is--that as a woman I would be bound to obey his orders without delay or demur."
"No, Dors. You may think it was perfectly natural, but you didnt experience it. The poor woman was in a high state of sexual excitement. She engaged all her senses ... smelled her fingers, licked them. If she could have heard hair grow, she would have listened avidly."
"But thats what I mean by natural. Anything you make forbidden gains sexual attractiveness. Would you be particularly interested in womens breasts if you lived in a society in which they were displayed at all times?"
"I think I might."
"Wouldnt you be more interested if they were always hidden, as in most societies they are?-- Listen, let me tell you something that happened to me. I was at a lake resort back home on Cinna ... I presume you have resorts on Helicon, beaches, that sort of thing?"
"Of course," said Seldon, slightly annoyed. "What do you think Helicon is, a world of rocks and mountains, with only well water to drink?"
"No offense, Hari. I just want to make sure youll get the point of the story. On our beaches at Cinna, were pretty lighthearted about what we wear ... or dont wear."
"Nude beaches?"
"Not actually, though I suppose if someone removed all of his or her clothing it wouldnt be much remarked on. The custom is to wear a decent minimum, but I must admit that what we consider decent leaves very little to the imagination."
Seldon said, "We have somewhat higher standards of decency on Helicon."
"Yes, I could tell that by your careful treatment of me, but to each its own. In any case, I was sitting at the small beach by the lake and a young man approached to whom I had spoken earlier in the day. He was a decent fellow I found nothing particularly wrong with. He sat on the arm of my chair and placed his right hand on my left thigh, which was bare, of course, in order to steady himself.
"After we had spoken for a minute and a half or so, he said, impishly. Here I am. You know me hardly at all and yet it seems perfectly natural to me that I place my hand on your thigh. Whats more, it seems perfectly natural to you, since you dont seem to mind that it remains there.
"It was only then that I actually noticed that his hand was on my thigh. Bare skin in public somehow loses some of its sexual quality. As I said, its the hiding from view that is crucial.
"And the young man felt this too, for he went on to say, Yet if I were to meet you under more formal conditions and you were wearing a gown, you wouldnt dream of letting me lift your gown and place my hand on your thigh on the precise spot it now occupies.
"I laughed and we continued to talk of this and that. Of course, the young man, now that my attention had been called to the position of his hand, felt it no longer appropriate to keep it there and removed it.
"That night I dressed for dinner with more than usual care and appeared in clothing that was considerably more formal than was required or than other women in the dining room were wearing. I found the young man in question. He was sitting at one of the tables. I approached, greeted him, and said, Here I am in a gown, but under it my left thigh is bare. I give you permission. Just lift the gown and place your hand on my left thigh where you had it earlier.
"He tried. Ill give him credit for that, but everyone was staring. I wouldnt have stopped him and Im sure no one else would have stopped him either, but he couldnt bring himself to do it. It was no more public then than it had been earlier and the same people were present in both cases. It was clear that I had taken the initiative and that I had no objections, but he could not bring himself to violate the proprieties. The conditions, which had been hand-on-thigh in the afternoon, were not hand-on-thigh in the evening and that meant more than anything logic could say."
Seldon said, "I would have put my hand on your thigh."
"Are you sure?"
"Positive."
"Even though your standards of decency on the beach are higher than ours are?"
"Yes."
Dors sat down on her own cot, then lay down with her hands behind her head. "So that youre not particularly disturbed that Im wearing a nightgown with very little underneath it."
"Im not particularly shocked. As for being disturbed, that depends on the definition of the word. Im certainly aware of how youre dressed."
"Well, if were going to be cooped up here for a period of time, well have to learn to ignore such things."
"Or take advantage of them," said Seldon, grinning. "And I like your hair. After seeing you bald all day, I like your hair."
"Well, dont touch it. I havent washed it yet." She half-closed her eyes. "Its interesting. Youve detached the informal and formal level of respectability. What youre saying is that Helicon is more respectable at the informal level than Cinna is and less respectable at the formal level. Is that right?"
"Actually, Im just talking about the young man who placed his hand on your thigh and myself. How representative we are as Cinnians and Heliconians, respectively, I cant say. I can easily imagine some perfectly proper individuals on both worlds--and some madcaps too."
"Were talking about social pressures. Im not exactly a Galactic traveler, but Ive had to involve myself in a great deal of social history. On the planet of Derowd, there was a time when premarital sex was absolutely free. Multiple sex was allowed for the unmarried and public sex was frowned upon only when traffic was blocked: And yet, after marriage, monogamy was absolute and unbroken. The theory was that by working off all ones fantasies first, one could settle down to the serious business of life."
"Did it work?"
"About three hundred years ago that stopped, but some of my colleagues say it stopped through external pressure from other worlds who were losing too much tourist business to Derowd. There is such a thing as overall Galactic social pressure too."
"Or perhaps economic pressure, in this case."
"Perhaps. And being at the University, by the way, I get a chance to study social pressures, even without being a Galactic traveler. I meet people from scores of places inside and outside of Trantor and one of the pet amusements in the social science departments is the comparison of social pressures.
"Here in Mycogen, for instance, I have the impression that sex is strictly controlled and is permitted under only the most stringent rules, all the more tightly enforced because it is never discussed. In the Streeling Sector, sex is never discussed either, but it isnt condemned. In the Jennat Sector, where I spent a week once doing research, sex is discussed endlessly, but only for the purpose of condemning it. I dont suppose there are any two sectors in Trantor--or any two worlds outside Trantor--in which attitudes toward sex are completely duplicated."
Seldon said, "You know what you make it sound like? It would appear--"
Dors said, "Ill tell you how it appears. All this talk of sex makes one thing clear to me. Im simply not going to let you out of my sight anymore."
"What?"
"Twice I let you go, the first time through my own misjudgment and the second because you bullied me into it. Both times it was clearly a mistake. You know what happened to you the first time."
Seldon said indignantly, "Yes, but nothing happened to me the second time."
"You nearly got into a lot of trouble. Suppose you had been caught indulging in sexual escapades with a Sister?"
"It wasnt a sexual--"
"You yourself said she was in a high state of sexual excitement."
"But--"
"It was wrong. Please get it through your head, Hari. From now on, you go nowhere without me."
"Look," said Seldon freezingly, "my object was to find out about Mycogenian history and as a result of the so-called sexual escapade with a Sister, I have a book--the Book."
"The Book! True, theres the Book. Lets see it."
Seldon produced it and Dors thoughtfully hefted it.
She said, "It might not do us any good, Hari. This doesnt look as though it will fit any projector Ive ever encountered. That means youll have to get a Mycogenian projector and theyll want to know why you want it. Theyll then find out you have this Book and theyll take it away from you."
Seldon smiled. "If your assumptions were correct, Dors, your conclusions would be inescapable, but it happens that this is not the kind of book you think it is. Its not meant to be projected. The material is printed on various pages and the pages are turned. Raindrop Forty-Three explained that much to me."
"A print-book!" It was hard to tell whether Dors was shocked or amused. "Thats from the Stone Age."
"Its certainly pre-Empire," said Seldon, "but not entirely so. Have you ever seen a print-book?"
"Considering that Im a historian? Of course, Hari."
"Ah, but like this one?"
He handed over the Book and Dors, smiling, opened it--then turned to another page--then flipped the pages. "Its blank," she said.
"It appears to be blank. The Mycogenians are stubbornly primitivistic, but not entirely so. They will keep to the essence of the primitive, but have no objection to using modern technology to modify it for conveniences sake. Who knows?"
"Maybe so, Hari, but I dont understand what youre saying."
"The pages arent blank, theyre covered with microprint. Here, give it back. If I press this little nubbin on the inner edge of the cover-- Look!"
The page to which the book lay open was suddenly covered with lines of print that rolled slowly upward.
Seldon said, "You can adjust the rate of upward movement to match your reading speed by slightly twisting the nubbin one way or the other. When the lines of print reach their upward limit when you reach the bottom line, that is--they snap downward and turn off. You turn to the next page and continue."
"Where does the energy come from that does all this?"
"It has an enclosed microfusion battery that lasts the life of the book."
"Then when it runs down--"
"You discard the book, which you may be required to do even before it runs down, given wear and tear, and get another copy. You never replace the battery."
Dors took the Book a second time and looked at it from all sides. She said, "I must admit I never heard of a book like this."
"Nor I. The Galaxy, generally, has moved into visual technology so rapidly, it skipped over this possibility."
"This is visual."
"Yes, but not with the orthodox effects. This type of book has its advantages. It holds far more than an ordinary visual book does."
Dors said, "Wheres the turn-on?--Ah, let me see if I can work it." She had opened to a page at random and set the lines of print marching upward. Then she said, "Im afraid this wont do you any good, Hari. Its pre-Galactic. I dont mean the book. I mean the print ... the language."
"Can you read it, Dors? As a historian--"
"As a historian, Im used to dealing with archaic language--but within limits. This is far too ancient for me. I can make out a few words here and there, but not enough to be useful."
"Good," said Seldon. "If its really ancient, it will be useful."
"Not if you cant read it."
"I can read it," said Seldon. "Its bilingual. You dont suppose that Raindrop Forty-Three can read the ancient script, do you?"
"If shes educated properly, why not?"
"Because I suspect that women in Mycogen are not educated past household duties. Some of the more learned men can read this, but everyone else would need a translation to Galactic." He pushed another nubbin. "And this supplies it."
The lines of print changed to Galactic Standard.
"Delightful," said Dors in admiration.
"We could learn from these Mycogenians, but we dont."
"We havent known about it."
"I cant believe that. I know about it now. And you know about it. There must be outsiders coming into Mycogen now and then, for commercial or political reasons, or there wouldnt be skincaps so ready for use. So every once in a while someone must have caught a glimpse of this sort of print-book and seen how it works, but its probably dismissed as something curious but not worth further study, simply because its Mycogenian."
"But is it worth study?"
"Of course. Everything is. Or should be. Hummin would probably point to this lack of concern about these books as a sign of degeneration in the Empire." He lifted the Book and said with a gush of excitement, "But I am curious and I will read this and it may push me in the direction of psychohistory."
"I hope so," said Dors, "but if you take my advice, youll sleep first and approach it fresh in the morning. You wont learn much if you nod over it."
Seldon hesitated, then said, "How maternal you are!"
"Im watching over you."
"But I have a mother alive on Helicon. I would rather you were my friend."
"As for that, I have been your friend since first I met you." She smiled at him and Seldon hesitated as though he were not certain as to the appropriate rejoinder.
Finally he said, "Then Ill take your advice--as a friend--and sleep before reading."
He made as though to put the Book on a small table between the two cots, hesitated, turned, and put it under his pillow.
Dors Venabili laughed softly. "I think youre afraid I will wake during the night and read parts of the Book before you have a chance to. Is that it?"
"Well," said Seldon, trying not to look ashamed, "that may be it. Even friendship only goes so far and this is my book and its my psychohistory."
"I agree," said Dors, "and I promise you that we wont quarrel over that. By the way, you were about to say something earlier when I interrupted you. Remember?"
Seldon thought briefly. "No."
In the dark, he thought only of the Book. He gave no thought to the hand-on-thigh story. In fact, he had already quite forgotten it, consciously at least.

第四十七章
　　“摸你的头发？”铎丝•凡纳比里一面说，一面望着谢顿的头发，仿佛她自己也想摸一下。
谢顿稍微避开一步：“拜托别这样，那女人表现得好像有些性变态。”
“从她的角度而言，我想应该就是。你自己没有从中得到乐趣吗？”
“乐趣？它使我全身起鸡皮疙瘩。当她终于停手之后，我才能继续呼吸。我本来还一直担心，她会再提出什么样的条件？”
铎丝哈哈大笑：“你怕她会强迫你发生性关系——还是你内心正期待如此？”
“我向你保证我没那么想，我只是想要那本典籍。”
此刻他们在自己的房间里，铎丝打开了她的电磁场扭曲器，以确保不会有人偷听到他们的谈话。
麦曲生的夜晚即将降临。谢顿早已脱下人皮帽与裰服，也已经洗过澡。洗澡时他特别注意自己的头发，总共冲洗了两次。现住他坐在他的便床上，穿着一件轻薄的睡衣，那是他在衣橱里找到的。
铎丝的双眼骨碌碌地乱转：“她知不知道你的胸部也有毛？”
“当时我就在祈祷她不会想到这一点。”
“可怜的哈里。你该知道，这些都是绝对自然的。如果我和一位兄弟单独相处，我也可能有类似的麻烦。我确信还要更糟，因为他会相信——从麦曲生这种社会结构看来——我身为女性，一定会服从他的命令，绝不会有任何迟疑或异议。”
“不，铎丝。你或许认为这是绝对自然的事，可是你没亲身经历过。当时，那可怜的女人处于高度性兴奋的状态。她所有的感官全用上了……不但闻她的手指，还伸舌头来舔。如果她能听见头发生长的声音，她也会贪婪地专心倾听。”
“但那正是我所谓的‘自然’，任何遭禁的事物都会产生性吸引力。如果你生活在一个妇女随时袒胸的社会，你会不会对女性的乳房特别感兴趣？”
“我想我可能会。”
“假如它们总是被遮起来，就像在人多数社会一样，难道你不会更感兴趣吗？
“听着，让我告诉你一件我亲身的经历。当时，我是在母星锡纳的一个湖滨度假胜地……我猜你们赫利肯也有度假胜地，例如沙滩之类的地方。”
“当然有，”谢顿有些恼火，“你把赫利肯想成什么？一个只有山脉和岩石，只有井水可以喝的世界？”
“我无意冒犯，哈里，只是要确定你能了解故事的背景。在锡纳的沙滩上，我们很不在意穿些什么……或是不穿什么。”
“裸体沙滩？”
“也没到那种程度，不过我想，假如有人把衣服全部脱掉，别人也不会多说什么。习惯上的穿着是得体的下限，但我必须承认，我们心目中的得体，并未留下什么想象空间。”
谢顿说：“在赫利肯，我们对得体的标准多少要高一点。”
“没错，从你对我的谨慎态度就能看得出来，可是各个世界总有个别差异。言归正传，有一次，我正坐在湖滨的沙滩上，一名年轻男子走了过来，当天稍早的时候，我曾和他讲过几句话。他是个举止得体的人，我不觉得他有什么不对劲。他坐上我的椅子扶手，将他的右手放在我的左大腿上，以便稳住他的身子。当然，我的大腿裸露在外。
“我们聊了大约一分半钟之后，他以顽皮的口气说：‘我坐在这里。你几乎不认识我，但我觉得将手放在你大腿上，似乎是一件很自然的事。非但如此，你好像也感到它很自然，因为你似乎不介意让它留在那里。’“直到那个时候，我才真正注意到他的手在我的大腿上。裸露在大庭广众之下的肌肤，多少丧失一些性的本质。正如我刚才所说，关键在于不让人看见的部分。
“那年轻男子也察觉到速一点，因为他继续说：‘但我若是在比较正式的场合遇到你，你穿着一件礼服，那你做梦也不会想到让我掀起你的礼服，将手放在你大腿上一模一样的位置。’“我哈哈大笑，然后我们继续聊了些别的。当然，由于我已注意到他的手放在哪里，那年轻人感到再让它留在那儿并不妥当，所以把手移开了。
“当天晚上用餐时，我打扮得较平常更为用心。那个场合不需要特别讲究穿着，我却穿得比餐厅中其他女士都正式。我找到那个年轻人，他坐在其中一个餐桌旁。我走过去，向他打个招呼，然后说：‘我现在穿着一什礼服，但里面的左腿是赤裸的。我准许你把我的礼服掀起来，将你的手放在我的左大腿、你早先所放的那个位置上。’“他试了一下——这点我不得不佩服他。每个人都盯着我们看。我不会阻止他，我也确定没有别人会阻止他，他却没法让自己真的那么做。当时的场合不比白天更为公开，而且在场的是同样一批人。采取主动的显然是我，我绝不会反对，但他就是不能让自己逾矩。当天下午让他能毛手毛脚的条件，到了晚上不再存在，这要比任何逻辑意义更为重大。”
谢顿说：“要是我就会把手放在你的大腿上。”
“你确定吗？”
“绝对确定。”
“即使你们对于沙滩穿着的得体标准比我们高？”
“没错。”
铎丝坐到她的便床上，然后躺下来，以双手垫着头部。“所以说，虽然我穿着一件晚礼服，里面几乎没穿，也不会带给你特别的困扰。”
“我不会特别震惊。至于困扰嘛，要看这个词怎样定义。我当然晓得你如何穿着。”
“嗯，假如我们将被关在这里一段时间，我们必须学习如何漠视这种事。”
“或者善加利用。”谢顿咧嘴笑了笑，“而且我喜欢你的头发，看了一整天光头的你，我喜欢你的头发。”
“唉，不要摸，我还没洗头。”她将眼睛半闭起来，“这很有趣，你将正式和非正式的庄重层面分了开来。你这话显示，赫利肯在非正式层面比锡纳更庄重，在正式层面则没那么庄重。对不对？”
“事实上，你只讲到那个将手放在你大腿上的年轻人，以及我们自已而已。我们两个能代表多少锡纳人和赫利肯人，我可不敢说。随便想也能知道，两个世界上都有些循规蹈矩的君子，也有些粗鲁无礼的家伙。”
“我们是在谈论社会压力。我不算是真正的银河游客，但我必须投注许多心力在社会史上。比方说，狄罗德行星曾有过一段时期，未婚性行为是绝对自由的，未婚者可拥有多个性伴侣，公开性行为只有在阻碍交通时才会引起反感。然而一旦结婚之后，双方就会绝对遵守一夫一妻制。他们的理论是先让一个人实现所有的幻想，这个人就能定下心来面对严肃的生活。”
“有用吗？”
“大约三百年前就终止了，不过我的一些同事说，那是其他数个世界对它施压的结果，因为有太多观光客被狄罗德吸引过去。别忘了，还有银河社会整体压力这种东西。”
“或许应该是经济压力——就这个例子而言。”
“或许吧。此外，即使我不是个银河游客，但我常年待在大学里，所以仍有机会研究社会压力。我能遇到来自川陀里里外外、许许多多地方的人，而在社会科学系所里，深受喜爱的消遣之一就是比较各种社会压力。
“比方说在麦曲生这里，我有一个印象，性受到严格的控制，只有在最苛刻的规范下才被允许，而且实施得一定比想象中严格，因为从来没有任何人讨论；但在斯璀璘区，人们也从不讨论性话题，而它并未受到谴责；我曾在坚纳特区进行过一周的研究，该区的人无休无止地谈论性话题，但唯一的目的只是为了谴责。我认为川陀的任何两个区——或是川陀之外的任何两个世界——对性的态度都不会完全一样。”
谢顿说：“你知道你这话听来像是在说什么吗？它好像……”
铎丝说：“我来告诉你它像什么。我们谈论的这些有关性的话题，使我认清一件事：我不会再让你离开我的视线。”
“什么？”
“我两次让你单独行动，第一次出于我自己的误判，第二次则因为你出言恫吓；两次显然都是错误的决定。你自己知道第一次发生了什么事。”
谢顿愤慨地说：“没错，可是第二次什么意外也没发生。”
“你差点惹上天大的麻烦。假如你和这位姐妹沉迷于性游戏时被逮个正着，那还得了？”
“那不是性——”
“你自己说过，她当时处于高度性兴奋的状态。”
“可是——”
“这是不对的，请把这点装进你的脑袋，哈里。从现在起，你到哪里我就跟到哪里。”
“听着，”谢顿以冰冷的口吻说，“我的目的是找出麦曲生的历史，而所谓和一位姐妹玩性游戏的结果，是我得到了一本书——那本典籍。”
“典籍！是啊，有一本典籍，让我们看看吧。”
谢顿将它取出来，铎丝若有所思地拿在手中掂了掂。
她说：“它对我们也许没什么用，哈里。看来它好像跟我见过的投影机都不相容，这就代表你得找一台麦曲生投影机。这样一来，他们便会想要知道你要它做什么，然后他们势必发现你拥有这本典籍，就一定会从你手中将它抢回去。”
谢顿微微一笑：“如果你的假设全部正确，铎丝，那么你的结论无懈可击。仉它刚巧不是你所想的那种书，并不需要使用投影机。它的内容印在许多书页上，可以一页一页翻阅，这些雨点四三都对我解释过了。”
“一本印刷书！”很难判断铎丝究竟是震惊或者是高兴，“那是石器时代的古物。”
“它的确是前帝国时代之前的产物，”谢顿说，“但也有后来添加的部分。你曾经见过印刷书吗？”
“当然见过，哈里，你忘了我是历史学家？”
“啊，但是像这本吗？”
他将典籍递过去。铎丝笑着将它打开，再翻到另一页，接着从头到尾迅速翻了一遍。“是空白的。”她说。
“应该说看来是空白的。麦曲生人是顽固的原始主义者，但并非完全如此。他们会固守原始的精髓，可是不反对为了增加便利，而利用现代科技进行改良，谁知道呢？”
“或许是吧，哈里，不过我不懂你在说什么。”
“这些书页不是空白的，上面都有缩微印刷字体。来，还给我。如果我按下封面内缘的这个小球——看！”
翻开的那页突然浮现出印刷字体，字体一行行缓缓向上移动。
谢顿说：“你只要前后稍微扭动这个小球，就可以调节上移的快慢，以配合你自己的阅读速率。当本页的字迹达到下限，也就是说，当你读到底端那一行的时候，它们就会猛然下落，然后自动关掉。这时，你就该翻到下一页。”
“发挥这些功能的能量从哪里来？”
“里面封装着一个微融合电池，它和这本书的寿命一样长。”
“那么当电用完了……”
“你就得丢掉这本书——或许还等不到电用完，你就会因为书磨损得太厉害，不得不把它丢了。新书随换随有——你永远不必更换电池。”
铎丝再次接过那本典籍，从各个角对观察它：“我必须承认，我从来没听说过像这样的书。”
“我也没有。一般而苦，银河早已跃过这个阶段，进入了视讯科技，以致略过了这个可能性。”
“这正是视讯啊。”
“没错，但它缺乏正统视讯的效果。不过这种形式的书自有其优点，它比普通视讯书籍的容量大许多倍。”
铎丝说：“开关在哪里？啊，让我看看自己会不会操作。”她信手翻开一页，并将印刷字体设定成上移。
然后她又说：“只怕这对你不会有任何用处，哈里，它是前银河时代的。我不是指这本书，我指的是印刷字体……是它的语言文字。”
“你读得懂吗，铎丝？身为历史学家……
“身为历史学家，我习惯于接触古代语文，但总有个限度。这对我而言实住太古老，我能在某些字句中认出几个字，却不足以派上用场。”
“好，”谢顿说，“如果它真的够古老，就一定会有用。”
“你读不懂就没用。”
“我读得懂，”谢顿说，“它是双语的。你不会以为雨点四三能读古代手稿吧，对不对？”
“假若她受过良好教育，又有何不可？”
“因为我怀疑麦曲生女性接受的教育不会超过家事的范畴。某些较有学问的人应该读得懂，但其他人都需要银河标准语的译本。”他按下另一个小球，“这样就行了。”
印刷字体立刻变作银河标准语文。
“好极了！，‘铎丝赞叹道。
“我们可以向这些麦曲生人学习一些事物，但我们没有这么做。”
“因为我们不知道啊。”
“我无法相信这点。现在我知道，而你也知道了。一定会有外人偶尔来到麦曲生，为了商业或政治目的，否则不会有许多人皮帽随时备用。所以每隔一段时间，总会有人瞥见这种印刷书，而且目睹它的运作。可是，它也许被当成稀奇但不值得深入研究的东西，而被那些人抛到脑后，只因它是麦曲生的产品。”
“但它真值得研究吗？”
“当然，每样东西都值得，或者说应该值得。夫铭也许会将对这些书漠不关心的现象，视为帝国正在哀落的一项征兆。”
他举起那本典籍，带着一股兴奋说道：“可是我有好奇心，我会阅读这玩意，它或许会将我推向心理史学的正道。”
“希望如此，”铎丝说，“但你若肯接受我的劝告，就该先睡一觉，等明早神清气爽时再来研究。假如你一直对着它打瞌睡，那是不可能学到什么的。”
谢顿迟疑了一下，然后说：“你可真有母性啊！”
“我是在照顾你。”
“可是我的母亲在赫利肯活得好好的，我宁愿你做我的朋友。”
“至于这点嘛，我第一次见到你的时候，就已经是你的朋友了。”
她冲着他微笑，谢顿却犹豫起来，仿佛不确定应该怎样回答才算妥当。最后他说：“那我就接受你的劝告——一位朋友的劝告，先睡一觉再说。”
他的动作像是要将典籍放在两床之间的小桌上，迟疑一会儿之后，他又转过身来，将它放在自己的枕头底下。
铎丝•凡纳比里轻轻笑再声来：“我想你是怕我会整夜不睡，在你没有机会阅读这本典籍之前，就抢先翻看部分内容。是不是这样？”
“嗯，”谢顿试图避免显露愧色，“也许是吧，即使友谊也该适可而止。这是我的书，也是我的心理史学。”
“我同意，”铎丝说，“而且我答应你，我们不会为这点争吵。对了，刚才你正想说什么，结果被我给打断了，记得吗？”
谢顿很快想了一下：“不记得。”
在黑暗中，他想到的只是那本典籍，并未将心思放在那个毛手毛脚的故事上。事实上，他几乎已经忘光了——至少在意识的层面如此。
Chapter 48

Venabili woke up and could tell by her timeband that the night period was only half over. Not hearing Haris snore, she could tell that his cot was empty. If he had not left the apartment, then he was in the bathroom. She tapped lightly on the door and said softly, "Hari?"
He said, "Come in," in an abstracted way and she did. The toilet lid was down and Seldon, seated upon it, held the Book open on his lap. He said, quite unnecessarily, "Im reading."
"Yes, I see that. But why?"
"I couldnt sleep. Im sorry."
"But why read in here?"
"If I had turned on the room light, I would have woken you up."
"Are you sure the Book cant be illuminated?"
"Pretty sure. When Raindrop Forty-Three described its workings, she never mentioned illumination. Besides, I suppose that would use up so much energy that the battery wouldnt last the life of the Book." He sounded dissatisfied.
Dors said, "You can step out, then. I want to use this place, as long as Im here."
When she emerged, she found him sitting cross-legged on his cot, still reading, with the room well lighted.
She said, "You dont look happy. Does the Book disappoint you?"
He looked up at her, blinking. "Yes, it does. Ive sampled it here and there. Its all Ive had time to do. The thing is a virtual encyclopedia and the index is almost entirely a listing of people and places that are of little use for my purposes. It has nothing to do with the Galactic Empire or the pre-Imperial Kingdoms either. It deals almost entirely with a single world and, as nearly as I can make out from what I have read, it is an endless dissertation on internal politics."
"Perhaps you underestimate its age. It may deal with a period when there was indeed only one world ... one inhabited world."
"Yes, I know," said Seldon a little impatiently. "Thats actually what I want--provided I can be sure its history, not legend. I wonder. I dont want to believe it just because I want to believe it."
Dors said, "Well, this matter of a single-world origin is much in the air these days. Human beings are a single species spread all over the Galaxy, so they must have originated somewhere. At least thats the popular view at present. You cant have independent origins producing the same species on different worlds."
"But Ive never seen the inevitability of that argument," said Seldon. "If human beings arose on a number of worlds as a number of different species, why couldnt they have interbred into some single intermediate species?"
"Because species cant interbreed. Thats what makes them species."
Seldon thought about it a moment, then dismissed it with a shrug. "Well, Ill leave it to the biologists."
"Theyre precisely the ones who are keenest on the Earth hypothesis."
"Earth? Is that what they call the supposed world of origin?"
"Thats a popular name for it, though theres no way of telling what it was called, assuming there was one. And no one has any clue to what its location might be."
"Earth!" said Seldon, curling his lips. "It sounds like a belch to me. In any case, if the book deals with the original world, I didnt come across it. How do you spell the word?"
She told him and he checked the Book quickly. "There you are. The name is not listed in the index, either by that spelling or any reasonable alternative."
"Really?"
"And they do mention other worlds in passing. Names arent given and there seems no interest in those other worlds except insofar as they directly impinge on the local world they speak of ... at least as far as I can see from what Ive read. In one place, they talked about The Fifty. I dont know what they meant. Fifty leaders? Fifty cities? It seemed to me to be fifty worlds."
"Did they give a name to their own world, this world that seems to preoccupy them entirely?" asked Dors. "If they dont call it Earth, what do they call it?"
"As youd expect, they call it the world or the planet. Sometimes they call it the Oldest or the World of the Dawn, which has a poetic significance, I presume, that isnt clear to me. I suppose one ought to read the Book entirely through and some matters will then grow to make more sense." He looked down at the Book in his hand with some distaste. "It would take a very long time, though, and Im not sure that Id end up any the wiser."
Dors sighed. "Im sorry, Hari. You sound so disappointed."
"Thats because I am disappointed. Its my fault, though. I should not have allowed myself to expect too much.--At one point, come to think of it, they referred to their world as Aurora. "
"Aurora?" said Dors, lifting her eyebrows.
"It sounds like a proper name. It doesnt make any sense otherwise, as far as I can see. Does it mean anything to you, Dors?"
"Aurora." Dors thought about it with a slight frown on her face. "I cant say Ive ever heard of a planet with that name in the course of the history of the Galactic Empire or during the period of its growth, for that matter, but I wont pretend to know the name of every one of the twenty-five million worlds. We could look it up in the University library--if we ever get back to Streeling. Theres no use trying to find a library here in Mycogen. Somehow I have a feeling that all their knowledge is in the Book. If anything isnt there, they arent interested."
Seldon yawned and said, "I think youre right. In any case, theres no use reading any more and I doubt that I can keep my eyes open any longer. Is it all right if I put out the light?"
"I would welcome it, Hari. And lets sleep a little later in the morning."
Then, in the dark, Seldon said softly, "Of course, some of what they say is ridiculous. For instance, they refer to a life expectancy on their world of between three and four centuries."
"Centuries?"
"Yes, they count their ages by decades rather than by years. It gives you a queer feeling, because so much of what they say is perfectly matter-of-fact that when they come out with something that odd, you almost find yourself trapped into believing it."
"If you feel yourself beginning to believe that, then you should realize that many legends of primitive origins assume extended life spans for early leaders. If theyre pictured as unbelievably heroic, you see, it seems natural that they have life spans to suit."
"Is that so?" said Seldon, yawning again.
"It is. And the cure for advanced gullibility is to go to sleep and consider matters again the next day."
And Seldon, pausing only long enough to think that an extended life span might well be a simple necessity for anyone trying to understand a Galaxy of people, slept.

第四十八章
　　铎丝•凡纳比里半夜醒来，她的计时带告诉她夜晚只过了一半。由于没有听到谢顿的鼾声，她可以断定他的便床是空的。倘若他未曾离开这间寓所，他就一定在浴室里面。
她轻轻敲了敲门，柔声说道：“哈里？’’
他以心不在焉的口气应道：“进来吧。”于是她走了进去。
马桶盖是放下来的，谢顿坐在上面，那本典籍摊在膝盖上。“我正在阅读。”
他这句话其实多此一举。
“是啊，我看得出来。可是为什么呢？”
“我睡不着，真抱歉。”
“可是为什么要在这里读呢？”
“如果我打开房间的灯，会把你惊醒。”
“你确定这本典籍不能自我照明吗？”
“十分确定。当雨点四三讲述它的功能时，她从未提到照明装置。此外，我想那样会消耗太多能量，使电池在这本典籍的寿命终结前结束。”他的口气听来并不满意。
铎丝说：“那么，你现在可以出去。我要用这个地方。”
当她出来的时候，发现他正盘腿坐在自己的便床上，仍然在专心阅读，而整个房间大放光明。
她说：“你看来不太高兴，这本典籍使你失望吗？”
他抬起头来，眨眨着眼睛望着她：“是的，的确如此。我能利用的时间不多，只好随意翻阅，我的时间只够这样做。这东西简直是一部百科全书，索引几乎全是人名和地名，对我根本没什么用。它完全未提到银河帝国或前帝国时代的众王国：记载的几乎全是单一世界的历史。根据我读到的部分分析，它的内容全是无休无止的内政议题。”
“或许你低估了它的年代。它记述的说不定的确是只有一个世界的时期……只有一个有人的世界。”
“没错，我知道。”谢顿显得有点不耐烦，“其实那正是我想要的——只要我能确定那是史实，而不是传说。我怀疑这点，我不安只为相信而相信。”
铎丝说：“嗯，有关单一世界起源的说法，近来实在流传其广。分布于整个银河的人类属于单一物种，所以必定源自某个角落——至少，这是目前最流行的观点。同样的物种，不可能独立起源于许多不同的世界。”
“但我一直看不出这个论证的必然性。”谢顿说，“如果人类当初起源于许多世界，分别属于许多不同的物种，为什么不能经由异种杂交，而形成一种居间的物种呢？”
“因为不同物种之间不能杂交，这点正是物种的定义。”
谢顿想了一会儿，然后耸耸肩，将它抛到脑后。“好啦，我把这个问题留给生物学家。”
“他们正是对地球假说最热衷的一群人。”
“地球？这是他们对那个所谓起源世界的称呼吗？”
“这是最普遍的名字，不过我们无法知晓当初它叫什么——假使真有个名字的话。至于它可能的位置，任何人都没有丝毫线索。”
“地球！”谢顿撅着嘴说，“在我听来好像浑球一样。无论如何，如果这本书讨论的是起源世界，我到现在都还没找到它。那个名字怎么写？”
她告诉他之后，他便迅速查阅那本典籍。“你看，这个名字没有列在索引里面，不论是那两个字，还是任何合理的同义字。”
“真的？”
“他们的确随口提到其他一些世界，不过没写出名字来。他们对其他世界好像都没兴趣，只有对他们叙述的那个世界造成直接侵扰的世界例外——至少，我目前读到的内容给我这种感觉。在某个地方，他们谈论到‘第五十号’。我不知道他们是什么意思，第五十位领袖？第五十个城市？在我看来似乎是第五十个世界。”
“他们有没有提到自己世界的名字——这个似乎占据他们一切心思的世界？”
铎丝问道：“如果他们不称它地球，他们又管它叫什么呢？”
“你该料想得到，他们管它叫‘本世界’或‘本行星’，有时则称它‘最古世界’或‘黎明世界’，我猜后者带有诗意的象征，但我不清楚其中的意思。我想我们得将这本典籍从头到尾读一遍，某些内容才会变得较有意义。”他带着几分烦恼的表情，低头望着手中的典籍。“不过，那将花上很长一段时问，而我不确定读完后会不会找到答案。”
铎丝叹了一口气：“我很遗憾，哈里。你的口气听来十分失望。”
“那是因为我真的很失望。不过，这是我自己的错，我不该让自己抱太大期望——啊，我想起来了，在某一处他们称他们的世界为‘奥罗拉’。”
“奥罗拉？”铎丝扬起眉毛。
“听来像是一个专有名词，据我所知，它没有任何其他含意。你懂它的意思吗，铎丝？”
“奥罗拉——”铎丝一面想，一面露出些许凝重的神色。“在银河帝国的整个历史中，甚至在它的发展阶段，我都不敢说听过哪个行星叫这个名字。但是，我不会装作知道两千五百万个世界的每一个名字。我们可以在大学图书馆查一下——假如我们还有机会回斯璀璘。在麦曲生这里，想找图书馆是徒劳无功的事。我总有一种感觉，他们所有的知识都在这本典籍中，若是什么东西不在里面，他们就不会有兴趣。”
谢顿打了一个哈欠：“我想你是对的。无论如何，再读下去也没什么用，而我怀疑我的眼睛还能睁多久。你不介意我把灯关了吧？”
“当然不介意，哈里。我们早上还可以睡晚一点。”
在接下来的黑暗中，谢顿轻声说道：“当然，他们的记述有些实在荒谬。比方说，他们提到在他们的世界上，平均寿命介于三至四个世纪之间。”
“世纪？”
“没错，他们不用年来计算年龄，而是以百年为单位。这给人一种诡异的感觉，因为不论他们提到什么古怪的事物，叙述口吻都显得稀松平常，使人几乎要信以为真。”
“假如你觉得自己几乎要信以为真，那么你就应该了解，许多有关原始起源的传说，都假设早期领袖人物拥有数倍于现代人的寿命。他们被刻画成具有不可思议的神勇，你想，配以超长的寿命似乎是很自然的事。”
“是这样的吗？”激顿又打了一个哈欠。
“是的。而治疗重度冤大头症的方法就是赶紧睡个好觉，等明天再来想这些问题。”
谢顿静默下来，忽而想到：如果要了解整个银河的人类。超长的寿命或许正是基本必要条件。刚想到这里，他便进入了梦乡。
Chapter 49

The next morning, feeling relaxed and refreshed and eager to begin his study of the Book again, Hari asked Dors, "How old would you say the Raindrop sisters are?"
"I dont know. Twenty ... twenty-two?"
"Well, suppose they do live three or four centuries."
"Hari. Thats ridiculous."
"Im saying suppose. In mathematics, we say suppose all the time and see if we can end up with something patently untrue or self-contradictory. An extended life span would almost surely mean an extended period of development. They might seem in their early twenties and actually be in their sixties."
"You can try asking them how old they are."
"We can assume theyd lie."
"Look up their birth certificates."
Seldon smiled wryly. "Ill bet you anything you like--a roll in the hay, if youre willing--that theyll claim they dont keep records or that, if they do, they will insist those records are closed to tribespeople."
"No bet," said Dors. "And if thats true, then its useless trying to suppose anything about their age."
"Oh no. Think of it this way. If the Mycogenians are living extended life spans that are four or five times that of ordinary human beings, they cant very well give birth to very many children without expanding their population tremendously. You remember that Sunmaster said something about not having the population expand and bit off his remarks angrily at that time."
Dors said, "What are you getting at?"
"When I was with Raindrop Forty-Three, I saw no children."
"On the microfarms?"
"Yes."
"Did you expect children there? I was with Raindrop Forty-Five in the shops and on the residential levels and I assure you I saw a number of children of all ages, including infants. Quite a few of them."
"Ah." Seldon looked chagrined. "Then that would mean they cant be enjoying extended life spans."
Dors said, "By your line of argument, I should say definitely not. Did you really think they did?"
"No, not really. But then you cant close your mind either and make assumptions without testing them one way or another."
"You can waste a lot of time that way too, if you stop to chew away at things that are ridiculous on the face of it."
"Some things that seem ridiculous on the face of it arent. Thats all. Which reminds me. Youre the historian. In your work, have you ever come across objects or phenomena called robots?"
"Ah! Now youre switching to another legend and a very popular one. There are any number of worlds that imagine the existence of machines in human form in prehistoric times. These are called robots.
"The tales of robots probably originate from one master legend, for the general theme is the same. Robots were devised, then grew in numbers and abilities to the status of the almost superhuman. They threatened humanity and were destroyed. In every case, the destruction took place before the actual reliable historic records available to us today existed. The usual feeling is that the story is a symbolic picture of the risks and dangers of exploring the Galaxy, when human beings expanded outward from the world or worlds that were their original homes. There must always have been the fear of encountering other--and superior--intelligences."
"Perhaps they did at least once and that gave rise to the legend."
"Except that on no human--occupied world has there been any record or trace of any prehuman or nonhuman intelligence."
"But why robots? Does the word have meaning?"
"Not that I know of, but its the equivalent of the familiar automata. "
"Automata! Well, why dont they say so?"
"Because people do use archaic terms for flavor when they tell an ancient legend. Why do you ask all this, by the way?"
"Because in this ancient Mycogenian book, they talk of robots. And very favorably, by the way.--Listen, Dors, arent you going out with Raindrop Forty-Five again this afternoon?"
"Supposedly--if she shows up."
"Would you ask her some questions and try to get the answers out of her?"
"I can try. What are the questions?"
"I would like to find out, as tactfully as possible, if there is some structure in Mycogen that is particularly significant, that is tied in with the past, that has a sort of mythic value, that can--"
Dors interrupted, trying not to smile. "I think that what you are trying to ask is whether Mycogen has a temple."
And, inevitably, Seldon looked blank and said, "Whats a temple?"
"Another archaic term of uncertain origin. It means all the things you asked about--significance, past, myth. Very well, Ill ask. Its the sort of thing, however, that they might find difficult to speak of. To tribespeople, certainly."
"Nevertheless, do try."
Sacratorium
AURORA-- ... A mythical world, supposedly inhabited in primordial times, during the dawn of interstellar travel. It is thought by some to he the perhaps equally mythical "world of origin" of humanity and to be another name for "Earth." The people of the Mycogen (q.v.) Sector of ancient Trantor reportedly held themselves to be descended from the inhabitants of Aurora and made that tenet central to their system of beliefs, concerning which almost nothing else is known ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第四十九章
　　早上，谢顿觉得心情轻松、神清气爽，急着想要继续研究那本典籍。他对铎丝说：“你认为雨点姐妹有多大年纪？”
“我不知道，二十……二十二？”
“嗯，假设他们真能活三四个世纪……”
“哈里，那太荒谬了。”
“我是说假设。在数学中，我们一天到晚在说‘假设’，看看是否会导致什么明显的错误，或是自相矛盾的结果。倍增的寿命几乎确定意味着倍增的发育期，她们可能看来二十出头，实际上已经六十几岁。”
“你可以试着问问她们几岁。”
“她们很可能会说谎。”
“那就查查她们的出生证明。”
谢顿露出一丝苦笑：“我随便你赌什么都可以——和你在干草堆打滚，如果你愿意。我赌她们会声称没有那种记录，即使有的话，她们也会坚持那些记录不能对外族人曝光？”
“不赌。”铎丝说，“假如这是真的，那么试图对她们的年龄做任何假设都没用。”
“噢，不。你想想，如果麦曲生人拥有超长的寿命，长达普通人类的四五倍，他们就不太可能生育太多子女，否则会使他们的人口剧增？你该记得，日主说过不能让人口增加之类的话，而且还愤愤地连忙住口。”
铎丝说：“你想说什么？”
“当我和雨点四三在一起的时候，始终没见到小孩。”
“在微生农场？”
“对。”
“你指望那里会有小孩吗？昨天我和雨点四五在商店购物，还经过一些居住层。我向你保证，我看见许多各种年龄的儿童，包括婴儿在内，为数还真不少。”
“啊。”谢顿露出懊恼的表情，“那么这就代表他们不可能享有超长寿命。”
铎丝说：“根据你的推论方式，我会说绝无可能。你原来以为有可能吗？”
“不，并不认真。可是话说回来，你也不能封闭自己的心灵，仅仅做出了一些假设，而不利用各种方法一一检验。”
“假如你碰到表面看来荒谬绝伦的事，都要停下来细究一番，也会浪费很多时间。”
“有些事情表面看来似乎荒谬，事实却不然。这倒提醒了我，你是历史学家，在你的研究工作中，曾经碰到一种称为‘机仆’的对象或现象吗？”
“啊！现在你又转到另一个传说，而且是非常热门的一个。许多世界都猜想史前时代有人形机器存在，它们通称为机仆。有关机仆的故事也许最初都源自同一个传说，因为大意都一样。机仆是人类发明的，后来，它们的数量和能力都增长到近乎超人的地步。它们威胁到人类，最后被人类尽数毁灭。在每个传说中，毁灭行动都发生于真实历史记录早已无可考据的年代。我们通常觉得这个故事只是一种意象，代表人类从一个或数个源头母星开始向外扩张、探索整个银河时所面临的风险和危险。他们必定始终怀有一种恐惧，担心会遇到其他的——而且是超人的智慧生灵。”
“或许他们的确至少碰过一次，才会衍生出这个传说。”
“只不过在人类居住的世界上，都没有任何‘前人类’或‘非人类’智慧生灵的记录或遗迹。”
“可是为什么要叫机仆呢？这个名字有任何意义吗？”
“据我所知并没有，但它和一般常听到的‘机器人’是同义词。”
“机器人！哼，他们为什么不这样说？”
“因为在讲述占老传说时，人们喜欢使用古典词汇来营造气氛。对了，你为什么要问这些？”
“因为在这本古老的麦曲生典籍中，他们就捉到了机仆，而且还有极佳的评价。听我说，铎丝，你今天下午不是又要跟雨点四五出去吗？”
“原则上是——如果她现身。”
“你能不能问她一些问题，试图从她口中套出答案？”
“我可以试试，哪些问题？”
“我想要问出来——以尽可能技巧的方式——麦曲生有没有哪座建筑是意义特别重大的，是和过去息息相关的，是具有某种神话价值的，是可以……”
铎丝打断了他的话，她压抑着笑意说：“我想你试图问的问题，是麦曲生有没有一座寺庙。”
谢顿不可避免地露出茫然的表情：“寺庙是什么？”
“另一个起源不明的古老词汇。它意味着你问及的所有事物——重大意义、过去、神话。很好，我会问她。然而，这种事正是她们可能感到难以启齿的。当然，我是指对外族人而言。”
“纵然如此，还是试试吧。”
【上册完】
Chapter 50

The two Raindrops arrived at midmorning. Raindrop Forty-Five seemed as  cheerful as ever, but Raindrop Forty-Three paused just inside the door,  looking drawn and circumspect. She kept her eyes down and did not as  much as glance at Seldon.
Seldon looked uncertain and gestured to Dors, who said in a cheerful  businesslike tone of voice, "One moment, Sisters. I must give  instructions to my man or he wont know what to do with himself today."
They moved into the bathroom and Dors whispered, "Is something wrong?"
"Yes. Raindrop Forty-Three is obviously shattered. Please tell her that I will return the Book as soon as possible."
Dors favored Seldon with a long surprised look. "Hari," she said, "youre  a sweet, caring person, but you havent the good sense of an amoeba. If I  as much as mention the Book to the poor woman, shell be certain that  you told me all about what happened yesterday and then shell really be  shattered. The only hope is to treat her exactly as I would ordinarily."
Seldon nodded his head and said dispiritedly, "I suppose youre right."

Dors returned in time for dinner and found Seldon on his cot, still  leafing through the Book, but with intensified impatience. He looked up  with a scowl and said, "If were going to be staying here any length of  time, were going to need a communication device of some sort between us.  I had no idea when youd get back and I was a little concerned."
"Well, here I am," she said, removing her skincap gingerly and looking  at it with more than a little distaste. "Im really pleased at your  concern. I rather thought youd be so lost in the Book, you wouldnt even  realize I was gone."
Seldon snorted.
Dors said, "As for communications devices, I doubt that they are easy to  come by in Mycogen. It would mean easing communication with  tribespeople outside and I suspect the leaders of Mycogen are bound and  determined to cut down on any possible interaction with the great  beyond."
"Yes," said Seldon, tossing the Book to one side, "I would expect that  from what I see in the Book. Did you find out about the whatever you  called it ... the temple?"
"Yes," she said, removing her eyebrow patches. "It exists. There are a  number of them over the area of the sector, but theres a central  building that seems to be the important one.--Would you believe that one  woman noticed my eyelashes and told me that I shouldnt let myself be  seen in public? I have a feeling she intended to report me for indecent  exposure."
"Never mind that," said Seldon impatiently. "Do you know where the central temple is located?"
"I have directions, but Raindrop Forty-Five warned me that women were  not allowed inside except on special occasions, none of which are coming  up soon. Its called the Sacratorium."
"The what."
"The Sacratorium."
"What an ugly word. What does it mean?"
Dors shook her head. "Its new to me. And neither Raindrop knew what it  meant either. To them, Sacratorium isnt what the building is called, its  what it is. Asking them why they called it that probably sounded like  asking them why a wall is called a wall."
"Is there anything about it they do know?"
"Of course, Hari. They know what its for. Its a place thats devoted to  something other than the life here in Mycogen. Its devoted to another  world, a former and better one."
"The world they once lived on, you mean?"
"Exactly. Raindrop Forty-Five all but said so, but not quite. She couldnt bring herself to say the word."
"Aurora?"
"Thats the word, but I suspect that if you were to say it out loud to a  group of Mycogenians, they would be shocked and horrified. Raindrop  Forty-Five, when she said, The Sacratorium is dedicated to--, stopped at  that point and carefully wrote out the letters one by one with her  finger on the palm of her hand. And she blushed, as though she was doing  something obscene."
"Strange," said Seldon. "If the Book is an accurate guide, Aurora is  their dearest memory, their chief point of unification, the center about  which everything in Mycogen revolves. Why should its mention be  considered obscene? Are you sure you didnt misinterpret what the Sister  meant?"
"Im positive. And perhaps its no mystery. Too much talk about it would  get to tribespeople. The best way of keeping it secret unto themselves  is to make its very mention taboo."
"Taboo?"
"A specialized anthropological term. Its a reference to serious and  effective social pressure forbidding some sort of action. The fact that  women are not allowed in the Sacratorium probably has the force of a  taboo. Im sure that a Sister would be horrified if it was suggested that  she invade its precincts."
"Are the directions you have good enough for me to get to the Sacratorium on my own?"
"In the first place, Hari, youre not going alone. Im going with you. I  thought we had discussed the matter and that I had made it clear that I  cannot protect you at long distance--not from sleet storms and not from  feral women. In the second place, its impractical to think of walking  there. Mycogen may be a small sector, as sectors go, but it simply isnt  that small."
"An Expressway, then."
"There are no Expressways passing through Mycogenian territory. It would  make contact between Mycogenians and tribespeople too easy. Still,  there are public conveyances of the kind that are found on less  developed planets. In fact, thats what Mycogen is, a piece of an  undeveloped planet, embedded like a splinter in the body of Trantor,  which is otherwise a patchwork of developed societies.--And Hari, finish  with the Book as soon as possible. Its apparent that Rainbow  Forty-Three is in trouble as long as you have it and so will we be if  they find out."
"Do you mean a tribesperson reading it is taboo?"
"Im sure of it."
"Well, it would be no great loss to give it back. I should say that 95  percent of it is incredibly dull; endless in-fighting among political  groups, endless justification of policies whose wisdom I cannot possibly  judge, endless homilies on ethical matters which, even when  enlightened, and they usually arent, are couched with such infuriating  self-righteousness as to almost enforce violation."
"You sound as though I would be doing you a great favor if I took the thing away from you."
"Except that theres always the other 5 percent that discusses the  never-to-be-mentioned Aurora. I keep thinking that there may be  something there and that it may be helpful to me. Thats why I wanted to  know about the Sacratorium.
"Do you hope to find support for the Books concept of Aurora in the Sacratorium?"
"In a way. And Im also terribly caught up in what the Book has to say  about automata, or robots, to use their term. I find myself attracted to  the concept."
"Surely, you dont take it seriously?"
"Almost. If you accept some passages of the Book literally, then there is an implication that some robots were in human shape."
"Naturally. If youre going to construct a simulacrum of a human being, you will make it look like a human being."
"Yes, simulacrum means likeness, but a likeness can be crude indeed. An  artist can draw a stick figure and you might know he is representing a  human being and recognize it. A circle for the head, a stalk for the  body, and four bent lines for arms and legs and you have it. But I mean  robots that really look like a human being, in every detail."
"Ridiculous, Hari. Imagine the time it would take to fashion the metal  of the body into perfect proportions, with the smooth curve of  underlying muscles."
"Who said metal, Dors? The impression I got is that such robots were  organic or pseudo-organic, that they were covered with skin, that you  could not easily draw a distinction between them and human beings in any  way."
"Does the Book say that?"
"Not in so many words. The inference, however--"
"Is your inference, Hari. You cant take it seriously."
"Let me try. I find four things that I can deduce from what the Book  says about robots--and I followed up every reference the index gave.  First, as I say, they--or some of them--exactly resembled human beings;  second, they had very extended life spans--if you want to call it that."
"Better say effectiveness, " said Dors, "or youll begin thinking of them as human altogether."
"Third," said Seldon, ignoring her, "that some--or, at any rate, at least one--continues to live on to this day."
"Hari, thats one of the most widespread legends we have. The ancient  hero does not die but remains in suspended animation, ready to return to  save his people at some time of great need. Really, Hari."
"Fourth," said Seldon, still not rising to the bait, "there are some  lines that seem to indicate that the central temple--or the Sacratorium,  if thats what it is, though I havent found that word in the Book,  actually--contains a robot." He paused, then said, "Do you see?"
Dors said, "No. What should I see?"
"If we combine the four points, perhaps a robot that looks exactly like a  human being and that is still alive, having been alive for, say, the  last twenty thousand years, is in the Sacratorium."
"Come on, Hari, you cant believe that."
"I dont actually believe it, but I cant entirely let go either. What if  its true? What if--its only one chance out of a million, I admit--its  true? Dont you see how useful he could be to me? He could remember the  Galaxy as it was long before any reliable historical records existed. He  might help make psychohistory possible."
"Even if it was true, do you suppose the Mycogenians would let you see and interview the robot?"
"I dont intend to ask permission. I can at least go to the Sacratorium and see if theres something to interview first."
"Not now. Tomorrow at the earliest. And if you dont think better of it by morning, we go."
"You told me yourself they dont allow women--"
"They allow women to look at it from outside, Im sure, and I suspect that is all well get to do."
And there she was adamant.
Hari Seldon was perfectly willing to let Dors take the lead. She had  been out in the main roadways of Mycogen and was more at home with them  than he was. Dors Venabili, brows knitted, was less delighted with the  prospect. She said, "We can easily get lost, you know."
"Not with that booklet," said Seldon.
She looked up at him impatiently. "Fix your mind on Mycogen, Hari. What I  should have is a computomap, something I can ask questions of. This  Mycogenian version is just a piece of folded plastic. I cant tell this  thing where I am. I cant tell it by word of mouth and I cant even tell  it by pushing the necessary contacts. It cant tell me anything either  way. Its a print thing."
"Then read what it says."
"Thats what Im trying to do, but its written for people who are familiar with the system to begin with. Well have to ask."
"No, Dors. That would be a last resort. I dont want to attract  attention. I would rather we take our chances and try to find our own  way, even if it means making one or two wrong turns."
Dors leafed through the booklet with great attention and then said  grudgingly, "Well, it gives the Sacratorium important mention. I suppose  thats only natural. I presume everyone in Mycogen would want to get  there at one time or another." Then, after additional concentration, she  said, "Ill tell you what. Theres no way of taking a conveyance from  here to there."
"What?"
"Dont get excited. Apparently, theres a way of getting from here to  another conveyance that will take us there. Well have to change from one  to another."
Seldon relaxed. "Well, of course. You cant take an Expressway to half the places on Trantor without changing."
Dors cast an impatient glance at Seldon. "I know that too. Its just that  Im used to having these things tell me so. When they expect you to find  out for yourself, the simplest things can escape you for a while."
"All right, dear. Dont snap. If you know the way now, lead. I will follow humbly."
And follow her he did, until they came to an intersection, where they  stopped. Three white-kirtled males and a pair of gray-kirtled females  were at the same intersection. Seldon tried a universal and general  smile in their direction, but they responded with a blank stare and  looked away. And then the conveyance came. It was an outmoded version of  what Seldon, back on Helicon, would have called a gravi-bus. There were  some twenty upholstered benches inside, each capable of holding four  people. Each bench had its own doors on both sides of the bus. When it  stopped, passengers emerged on either side. (For a moment, Seldon was  concerned for those who got out on the traffic side of the gravi-bus,  but then he noticed that every vehicle approaching from either direction  stopped as it neared the bus. None passed it while it was not moving.)
Dors pushed Seldon impatiently and he moved on to a bench where two  adjoining seats were available. Dors followed after. (The men always got  on and got off first, he noticed.)
第五十章
第十一部 圣堂
奥罗拉：……一个神话世界，在太初时代、星际旅行的黎明期，其上应该曾有人类居住。有人认为它就是“地球”的别名——那个或许同样神秘的人类“起源世界”。
据说古川陀麦曲生区（参见该条）的民众，将自己视为奥罗拉居民的后裔。并以这点作为他们信仰体系的中心教条。
除此之外，外人对这个信仰几乎一无所知……
——《银河百科全书》


第五十章
雨点姐妹在十时左右抵达。雨点四五似乎快活依旧，但雨点四三只是伫立在门边，看来愁眉苦脸又小心翼翼。她始终低垂目光，连瞥也末瞥谢顿一眼。
谢顿显得有些不安，他对铎丝做了一个手势。于是铎丝以愉悦而老练的语气说：“等一下，姐妹们，我必须对我的男人做些指示，否则他不知道自己今天该做什么。”
他们走进浴室后，铎丝悄声说道：“有什么不对劲吗？”
“是的，雨点四三显然魂不守舍。请告诉她，我会尽快归还那本典籍。”
铎丝惊讶地看着谢顿，好一会儿才开口道：“哈里，”她说，“你很可爱，很体谅人，但你的感觉还比不上一条变形虫。要是我对那个可怜的女人提到那本典籍，她就会确定你把昨天的事全告诉了我，然后她才会真的神不守舍。我唯一能做的，就是以和平常一模一样的方式对待她。”
谢顿点了点头，垂头丧气地说：“我想你是对的。”
铎丝刚好赶在晚餐前回来，发现谢顿正坐在便床上。手里仍在翻阅那本典籍，可是显得越来越不耐烦。
他带着一脸阴霾抬起头来：“如果我们要在这里多待一些时日，我们就需要一套某种通讯装置。我根本不晓得你什么时候会回来，我真有点担心。”
“好啦，我现在回来了。”她一而说，一面小心翼翼地脱下人皮帽，表情厌恶地望着它。“你会担心真令我感到高兴。我还以为你早就被这本典籍迷住，甚至没有察觉我出门了。”
谢顿哼了一声。
铎丝说：“至于通讯装置，我相信在麦曲生不容易弄到手。否则，那就代表能轻易和外族人通讯。我觉得麦曲生的领袖都有坚定的意志，决心切断和外界一切可能的接触。”
“没错，”谢顿把典籍丢到一旁，“根据我阅读这本典籍的心得，这点我也料想得到。你有没有问到你所谓的那种……寺庙？”
“有的，”她一面说，一面将眉毛遮带摘下。“果然存在。在本区范围内，这种建筑为数甚多，可是有座中心建筑似乎是最重要的——你相不相信，有个女的注意到我的睫毛，告诉我说我不该在公共场所露面？我有一种感觉，她打算告发我犯了猥亵暴露罪。”
“别担心那个，”谢顿不耐烦地说，“你知道那座中心寺庙在哪里吗？”
“我问到了地址，但是雨点四五警告我，除非是一些特别的日子，否则女性一律不准进入，而最近都碰不到那种日子。对了，它称为圣堂。”
“什么？”
“圣堂。”
“多难听的名字，有什么意义吗？”
铎丝摇了摇头：“我第一次听到，两位雨点也都不知道它的意思。对她们而言，圣堂并非那座建筑的名字，它就是那座建筑物。问她们为何这样称呼，听来也许就像问她们为何把墙壁叫做墙壁。”
“关于这个圣堂，有没有她们知道的事？”
“当然有，哈里，她们知道它的用途，那个地方是一种不•属于麦曲生此地的生活。它是为了纪念另一个世界，原先那个较佳的世界。”
“他们一度居住的那个世界，你是这个意思吗？”
“完全正确。雨点四五几乎就是这么说的，不过没有说明白。她无法让自己说出那个名字。”
“奥罗拉？”
“就是这个名字，但我想你要是对一群麦曲生人大声说出这个名字，他们会感到极度震惊和恐惧。雨点四五说到‘圣堂是纪念……’就突然打住，改用手指在手掌上仔仔细细、一笔一画写下那个名字。然后她涨红了脸，仿佛做了什么下流的事。”
“真奇怪。”谢顿说，“如果这本典籍是正确的指南，奥罗拉就是他们最亲密的记忆，是他们凝聚的首要重心，是麦曲生境内万事万物运转的枢纽。为什么提到它会被视为下流呢？你确定没有误解那位姐妹的意思？”
“我很肯定，而这也许没什么神秘。谈得太多就会被外族人听去，最好的保密办法就是让它成为禁忌。”
“禁忌？”
“这是人类学的一个专用术语，意指一种严厉而有效的社会压力，足以禁止人们的某种行动。女性不准进入圣堂的这件事实，或许就有禁忌的力量在内。假如你建议一位姐妹侵入它的境域，我确定她一定会吓得半死。”
“你打听到的地址，足以让我自己找到圣堂吗？”
“首先我得告诉你，哈里，你不会自己单独行动——我要跟你一起去。我想我们已经讨论过这点，而且我说得很明白，我无法在远距离保护你——不论是对抗夹着冰珠的暴风雪，或者是如狼似虎的女人。其次，想走到那里去是不切实际的。就行政区而言，麦曲生或许是个小区，但绝未小到那种程度。”
“那么，改搭捷运吧。”
“没有捷运经过麦曲生境内，那会让麦曲生人和外族人的接触变得太容易。然而，这里还是有大众交通工具——属于低度开发行星常用的那种。事实上，这就是麦曲生的写照，一小块末开发的行星，像碎片一样嵌在川陀表面，否则川陀就完全由已开发社会连缀而成。还有，哈里，尽快把那本典籍读完。只要它还在你手上，雨点四三显然就身处险境，假如被别人发现的话，那么我们也会一样。”
“你的意思是说，外族人阅读典籍是一种禁忌？”
“我肯定是。”
“好吧，还回去也不会有太大损失。在我看来，百分之九十五的内容都枯燥得不可思议，例如政治团体间无休无止的明争暗斗，对一些本人无从判断多高明的政策无休无止的辩护。此外还有对伦理议题喋喋不休的说教，即使它是文明开化的思想，措辞中也充满令人愤慨的自以为是，几乎让人不想违反也难，况且通常根本不知所云。”
“听你的几气，好像我若是把它拿走，等于帮了你一个大忙。”
“不过，总是还有另外百分之五，讨论到那个不可直呼其名的奥罗拉。我猜，那里也许有什么东西，而它也许对我有帮助。这就是我想打听圣堂的原因。”
“你希望在圣堂里找到线索，以支持典籍中对奥罗拉的说法？”
“可以这么说。此外，我对典籍中提到的那些机器人——或者用他们的称呼，对那些机仆起了强烈的好奇心；我发现自己被这个想法深深吸引。”
“不用说，你不是当真的吧？”
“不，我不是随口说说。你若接受典籍中某些片段的字面意义，那么它就暗示着一件事实：某些机器人具有人形。”
“这很自然。假如你想建构人类的拟像，就会把它造得看来像人类。”
“没错，拟像的意思是‘相像’，但相像可以是很粗略的。一位艺术家如果单以线条表示人形，你也该认得出来。圆圈代表脑袋，长方形代表身体，四根弯曲的线条代表手脚，这就行了。但我的意思是说，就每个细节而言，机器人看起来都绝对酷似人类。”
“简直荒谬，哈里。想想看，要花多少时间才能将金属躯体塑成完美的比例，并且表现出内部肌肉的平滑纹理。”
“谁说金属了，铎丝？就我所得到的印象，这种机器人的材料都是有机或假有机体。它们外表覆盖着一层皮肤，很难从任何角度区分它们和真人的不同。”
“典籍上这么说吗？”
“没有用那么多字句。然而，根据推论……”
“那是你的推论，哈里。你不能太认真。”
“让我试试看。我已找遍索引中每一条有关机器人的资料，根据那本典籍对机器人所做的记述，我发现可以推论出四件事。第一，我已经说过，它们，或者它们的一部分，形体和人类一模一样。第二，它们拥有超长的寿命，如果你想这么说的话。”
“最好说‘有效期’。”铎丝说，“否则你会开始将它们完全当成人类。”
“第三，”谢顿并未理会她，继续说道，“有些——或者，无论如何至少有一个机器人——一直活到今天。”
“哈里，这是人类流传最广的传说之一。古代的英雄永远不死，只是进入一种生理机能停顿的状态，随时会在紧要关头回来拯救他的同胞。”
“第四，”谢顿仍然没有上钩，“有几行字似乎指出，那个中心寺庙——或者说圣堂，不过事实上，我在典籍中没找到这个词汇——那里面有个机器人。”他顿了一下，然后说：“你懂了吗？”
铎丝说：“不懂，我该懂些什么？”
“我们如果将这四点组合起来，那么圣堂里也许有个和真人一模一样的机器人，他至今仍旧活着，已经存活了……比如说两万年。”
“得了吧，哈里，你不可能相信这种事。”
“我不是真的相信，但我无法完全漠视。如果这是真的呢？我承认，这只有百万分之一的机会，不过若是真的呢？你看不出他对我会有多大帮助吗？他能记得古老的银河是什么样子，那是比任何可靠的历史记录还要古老而真实的描述。他或许能成就我的心理史学。”
“即使这是真的，你以为麦曲生人会让你跟这个机器人晤谈吗？”
“我并不打算请求他们准许，我至少可以先到圣堂去，看看那里是否有什么晤谈的对象。”
“现在不行，最快也要等明天。假如明天早上你还没改变决定，我们就去。”
“你自己告诉我，他们不允许女性——”
“他们允许女性站在外面看，这点我可以肯定，而我怀疑我们能做的也仅止于此。”
她的语气斩钉截铁。
Chapter 51
"For instance," she said and pointed to a smooth boxed-off area on the back of the bench directly before each of them. As soon as the conveyance had begun to move, words lit up, naming the next stop and the notable structures or crossways that were nearby.
"Now, that will probably tell us when were approaching the changeover we want. At least the sector isnt completely barbaric."
"Good," said Seldon. Then, after a while, leaning toward Dors, he whispered, "No one is looking at us. It seems that artificial boundaries are set up to preserve individual privacy in any crowded place. Have you noticed that?"
"Ive always taken it for granted. If thats going to be a rule of your psychohistory, no one will be very impressed by it."
As Dors had guessed, the direction plaque in front of them eventually announced the approach to the changeover for the direct line to the Sacratorium. They exited and again had to wait. Some buses ahead had already left this intersection, but another gravi-bus was already approaching. They were on a well-traveled route, which was not surprising; the Sacratorium was bound to be the center and heartbeat of the sector.
They got on the gravi-bus and Seldon whispered, "Were not paying."
"According to the map, public transportation is a free service."
Seldon thrust out his lower lip. "How civilized. I suppose that nothing is all of a piece, not backwardness, not barbarism, nothing."
But Dors nudged him and whispered, "Your rule is broken. Were being watched. The man on your right."

第五十一章
　　哈里•谢顿极乐意让铎丝带路。她曾经逛过麦曲生的大街，对这些街道比他熟悉。
铎丝•凡纳比里眉头紧锁，她对情况并没有那么乐观。“我们很容易迷路，你知道的。”
“有这本小册子就不会。”谢顿说。
她抬起头，不耐烦地望着他：“把你的心思放在麦曲生上面，哈里。我该拿的是一套计算机地图——我可以对它发问的那种东西。这份麦曲生地图只是一叠塑料布，我不能用嘴巴跟它说我在哪里；甚至不能借助按键告诉它。而它也不能告诉我什么，它只是个印刷品。”
“那就读读它的内容。”
“这正是我在试着做的事，但它是写给本来就熟悉这种系统的人看的，我们必须找人问路。”
“不，铎丝，那是最后的办法，我不想引人注意。我宁可我们自己碰碰运气，试着找出正确路径，即使因此转错一两个弯也无妨。”
铎丝极其专心地翻看那本小册子，然后不情不愿地说：“嗯，它对圣堂做了突出的描述，我想这是理所当然的事。我敢说，每一个麦曲生人总会想到那里去。”
她又仔细钻研了一会儿，说：“告诉你吧，根本没有任何从这儿到那儿的交通工具。”
“什么？”
“别激动。有办法从这里搭车到另一处，再改搭另一辆年带我们去那里。也就是说，我们必须换一次车。”
谢顿松了一口气：“嗯，当然。即使搭乘捷运，如果不换车，川陀也有一半地方到不了。”
铎丝不耐烦地瞥了谢顿一眼。“这点我也知道，只不过我习惯了让这类东西告诉我答案。当指望你来找出答案时，最简单的事都能让你好一阵子摸不着头绪。”
“好吧，铎丝，别生气。如果你现在知道该怎么走，那就带路吧，我将谦卑地跟在后面。”
于是他跟着她前进，到了一个交叉路口，两人停下了脚步。
在这个路口等车的，还有二位身穿白色裰服的男性，以及二位穿灰裰服的女性。谢顿试着向他们投以一个世界通行的微笑，他们却回敬了一个白眼，接着便将目光转开。
交通工具来了，那是一辆式样过时的车子，在谢顿的家乡赫利肯，通常称之为重力公交车。它里面有二十几张罩着布套的长椅，每张能容纳四个人。在公交车的两侧，每张长椅都有独立的车门。它停下来之后，乘客纷纷从两侧下车。（一时之间，谢顿不禁为那些从街心侧下车的人担心，但他随即注意到，来往车辆在接近公交车时都停了下来，而当公交车尚未开动时，没有任何一辆超越它。）
铎丝不耐烦地推了谢顿一下，他赶紧走到一张还有两个相连座位的长椅旁，铎丝则跟在他后面。（男士总是优先上下车，他注意到这点。）
铎丝低声对他说：“别再研究别人了，注意你的四周。”
“我会试试。”
“比如说——”她一面说，一面指着他们正前方椅背上隔出的一方平坦区域。
公交车开动后，那上面立刻亮出字迹，标示出下一站的站名、著名的建筑物，或是附近的十字路口。
“好了，我们接近转车的地方时，它或许会告诉我们。至少这一区并非全然未开化。”
“很好。”谢顿答道。过了一会儿，他倾身凑向铎丝，悄声说：“没有人在看我们。任何一个拥挤的地方，似乎都自动形成一个个人防线，好让每个人都能保有隐私。你注意到这点吗？”
“我已经司空见惯了。假如这将成为你的心理史学法则之一，没有人会觉得了不起。”
正如铎丝猜测的，最后他们面前的方向指示牌终于宣布：即将抵达圣堂直达专车的转车站。
他们下车之后，还得再等一下。前面几辆公交车已经离开这个路口，不过另有一辆重力公交车即将进站。他们将搭乘的是一条热门路线，这没什么好奇怪的，因为圣堂必定是本区的枢纽与心脏地带。
他们上了那辆重力公交车，谢顿惝声说道：“我们都没付钱。”
“根据这份地图，大众运输工具是免费的服务。”
谢顿撅起下唇：“多么文明啊。我想任何事物都不能一概而论，不论是落后、先进，或是任何一样事物。”
不料铎丝用手肘轻推他一下，压低声音说：“你的法则被打破了，已经有人盯上我们，坐在你右边的那个男的。”
Chapter 52

Seldons eyes shifted briefly. The man to his right was rather thin and seemed quite old. He had dark brown eyes and a swarthy complexion, and Seldon was sure that he would have had black hair if he had not been depilated. He faced front again, thinking. This Brother was rather atypical. The few Brothers he had paid any attention to had been rather tall, light-skinned, and with blue or gray eyes. Of course, he had not seen enough of them to make a general rule.
Then there was a light touch on the right sleeve of his kirtle. Seldon turned hesitantly and found himself looking at a card on which was written lightly, CAREFUL, TRIBESMAN!
Seldon started and put a hand to his skincap automatically. The man next to him silently mouthed, "Hair."
Seldons hand found it, a tiny exposure of bristles at his temple. He must have disturbed the skincap at some point or another. Quickly and as unobtrusively as possible, he tugged the skincap, then made sure that it was snug under the pretence of stroking his head.
He turned to his neighbor on his right, nodded slightly, and mouthed, "Thank you."
His neighbor smiled and said in a normal speaking voice, "Going to the Sacratorium?"
Seldon nodded. "Yes, I am."
"Easy guess. So am I. Shall we get off together?" His smile was friendly.
"Im with my--my--"
"With your woman. Of course. All three together, then?"
Seldon was not sure how to react. A quick look in the other direction showed him that Dorss eyes were turned straight ahead. She was showing no interest in masculine conversation--an attitude appropriate for a Sister. However, Seldon felt a soft pat on his left knee, which he took (with perhaps little justification) to mean: "Its all right."
In any case, his natural sense of courtesy was on that side and he said, "Yes, certainly."
There was no further conversation until the direction plaque told them they were arriving at the Sacratorium and Seldons Mycogenian friend was rising to get off.
The gravi-bus made a wide turn about the perimeter of a large area of the Sacratorium grounds and there was a general exodus when it came to a halt, the men sliding in front of the women to exit first. The women followed.
The Mycogenians voice crackled a bit with age, but it was cheerful. He said, "Its a little early for lunch my ... friends, but take my word for it that things will be crowded in not too long a time. Would you be willing to buy something simple now and eat it outside? I am very familiar with this area and I know a good place."
Seldon wondered if this was a device to maneuver innocent tribespeople into something or other disreputable or costly, yet decided to chance it. "Youre very kind," he said. "Since we are not at all familiar with the place, we will be glad to let you take the lead."
They bought lunch--sandwiches and a beverage that looked like milk--at an open-air stand. Since it was a beautiful day and they were visitors, the old Mycogenian said, they would go to the Sacratorium grounds and eat out of doors, the better to become acquainted with their surroundings.
During their walk, carrying their lunch, Seldon noted that, on a very small scale, the Sacratorium resembled the Imperial Palace and that the grounds around it resembled, on a minute scale, the Imperial grounds. He could scarcely believe that the Mycogenian people admired the Imperial institution or, indeed, did anything but hate and despise it, yet the cultural attraction was apparently not to be withstood.
"Its beautiful," said the Mycogenian with obvious pride.
"Quite," said Seldon. "How it glistens in the daylight."
"The grounds around it," he said, "are constructed in imitation of the government grounds on our Dawn World ... in miniature, to be sure."
"Did you ever see the grounds of the Imperial Palace?" asked Seldon cautiously.
The Mycogenian caught the implication and seemed in no way put out by it. "They copied the Dawn World as best they could too."
Seldon doubted that in the extreme, but he said nothing. They came to a semicircular seat of white stonite, sparkling in the light as the Sacratorium did.
"Good," said the Mycogenian, his dark eyes gleaming with pleasure. "No ones taken my place. I call it mine only because its my favorite seat. It affords a beautiful view of the side wall of the Sacratorium past the trees. Please sit down. Its not cold, I assure you. And your companion. She is welcome to sit too. She is a tribeswoman, I know, and has different customs. She ... she may speak if she wishes."
Dors gave him a hard look and sat down.
Seldon, recognizing the fact that they might remain with this old Mycogenian a while, thrust out his hand and said, "I am Hari and my female companion is Dors. We dont use numbers, Im afraid."
"To each his ... or her ... own," said the other expansively. "I am Mycelium Seventy-Two. We are a large cohort."
"Mycelium?" said Seldon a bit hesitantly.
"You seem surprised," said Mycelium. "I take it, then, youve only met members of our Elder families. Names like Cloud and Sunshine and Starlight--all astronomical."
"I must admit--" began Seldon.
"Well, meet one of the lower classes. We take our names from the ground and from the micro-organisms we grow. Perfectly respectable."
"Im quite certain," said Seldon, "and thank you again for helping me with my ... problem in the gravi-bus."
"Listen," said Mycelium Seventy-Two, "I saved you a lot of trouble. If a Sister had seen you before I did, she would undoubtedly have screamed and the nearest Brothers would have bustled you off the bus--maybe not even waiting for it to stop moving."
Dors leaned forward so as to see across Seldon. "How is it you did not act in this way yourself?"
"I? I have no animosity against tribespeople. Im a scholar."
"A scholar?"
"First one in my cohort. I studied at the Sacratorium School and did very well. Im learned in all the ancient arts and I have a license to enter the tribal library, where they keep book-films and books by tribespeople. I can view any book-film or read any book I wish to. We even have a computerized reference library and I can handle that too. That sort of thing broadens your mind. I dont mind a little hair showing. Ive seen pictures of men with hair many a time. And women too." He glanced quickly at Dors.
They ate in silence for a while and then Seldon said, "I notice that every Brother who enters or leaves the Sacratorium is wearing a red sash."
"Oh yes," said Mycelium Seventy-Two. "Over the left shoulder and around the right side of the waist--usually very fancily embroidered."
"Why is that?"
"Its called an obiah. It symbolizes the joy felt at entering the Sacratorium and the blood one would spill to preserve it."
"Blood?" said Dors, frowning.
"Just a symbol. I never actually heard of anyone spilling blood over the Sacratorium. For that matter, there isnt that much joy. its mostly wailing and mourning and prostrating ones self over the Lost World." His voice dropped and became soft. "Very silly."
Dors said, "Youre not a ... a believer?"
"Im a scholar," said Mycelium with obvious pride. His face wrinkled as he grinned and took on an even more pronounced appearance of age.
Seldon found himself wondering how old the man was. Several centuries?--No, theyd disposed of that. It couldnt be and yet, "How old are you?" Seldon asked suddenly, involuntarily.
Mycelium Seventy-Two showed no signs of taking offense at the question, nor did he display any hesitation at answering, "Sixty-seven."
Seldon had to know. "I was told that your people believe that in very early times everyone lived for several centuries."
Mycelium Seventy-Two looked at Seldon quizzically. "Now how did you find that out? Someone must have been talking out of turn ... but its true. There is that belief. Only the unsophisticated believe it, but the Elders encourage it because it shows our superiority. Actually, our life expectancy is higher than elsewhere because we eat more nutritionally, but living even one century is rare."
"I take it you dont consider Mycogenians superior," said Seldon.
Mycelium Seventy-Two said, "Theres nothing wrong with Mycogenians. Theyre certainly not inferior. Still, I think that all men are equal.--Even women," he added, looking across at Dors.
"I dont suppose," said Seldon, "that many of your people would agree with that."
"Or many of your people," said Mycelium Seventy-Two with a faint resentment. "I believe it, though. A scholar has to. Ive viewed and even read all the great literature of the tribespeople. I understand your culture. Ive written articles on it. I can sit here just as comfortably with you as though you were ... [tit]."
Dors said a little sharply, "You sound proud of understanding tribespeoples ways. Have you ever traveled outside Mycogen?"
Mycelium Seventy-Two seemed to move away a little. "No."
"Why not? You would get to know us better."
"I wouldnt feel right. Id have to wear a wig. Id be ashamed."
Dors said, "Why a wig? You could stay bald."
"No," said Mycelium Seventy-Two, "I wouldnt be that kind of fool. Id be mistreated by all the hairy ones."
"Mistreated? Why?" said Dors. "We have a great many naturally bald people everywhere on Trantor and on every other world too."
"My father is quite bald," said Seldon with a sigh, "and I presume that in the decades to come I will be bald too. My hair isnt all that thick now."
"Thats not bald," said Mycelium Seventy-Two. "You keep hair around the edges and over your eyes. I mean bald--no hair at all."
"Anywhere on your body?" said Dors, interested.
And now Mycelium Seventy-Two looked offended and said nothing.
Seldon, anxious to get the conversation back on track, said, "Tell me, Mycelium Seventy-Two, can tribespeople enter the Sacratorium as spectators?"
Mycelium Seventy-Two shook his head vigorously. "Never. Its for the Sons of the Dawn only."
Dors said, "Only the Sons?"
Mycelium Seventy-Two looked shocked for a moment, then said forgivingly, "Well, youre tribespeople. Daughters of the Dawn enter only on certain days and times. Thats just the way it is. I dont say I approve. If it was up to me, Id say, Go in. Enjoy if you can. Sooner others than me, in fact."
"Dont you ever go in?"
"When I was young, my parents took me, but--he shook his head--"it was just people staring at the Book and reading from it and sighing and weeping for the old days. Its very depressing. You cant talk to each other. You cant laugh. You cant even look at each other. Your mind has to be totally on the Lost World. Totally." He waved a hand in rejection. "Not for me. Im a scholar and I want the whole world open to me."
"Good," said Seldon, seeing an opening. "We feel that way too. We are scholars also, Dors and myself."
"I know," said Mycelium Seventy-Two.
"You know? How do you know?"
"Youd have to be. The only tribespeople allowed in Mycogen are Imperial officials and diplomats, important traders, and scholars--and to me you have the look of scholars. Thats what interested me in you. Scholars together." He smiled delightedly.
"So we are. I am a mathematician. Dors is a historian. And you?"
"I specialize in ... culture. Ive read all the great works of literature of the tribespeople: Lissauer, Mentone, Novigor--"
"And we have read the great works of your people. Ive read the Book, for instance.--About the Lost World."
Mycelium Seventy-Twos eyes opened wide in surprise. His olive complexion seemed to fade a little. "You have? How? Where?"
"At our University we have copies that we can read if we have permission."
"Copies of the Book?"
"Yes."
"I wonder if the Elders know this?"
Seldon said, "And Ive read about robots."
"Robots?"
"Yes. That is why I would like to be able to enter the Sacratorium. I would like to see the robot." (Dors kicked lightly at Seldons ankle, but he ignored her.)
Mycelium Seventy-Two said uneasily, "I dont believe in such things. Scholarly people dont." But he looked about as though he was afraid of being overheard.
Seldon said, "Ive read that a robot still exists in the Sacratorium."
Mycelium Seventy-Two said, "I dont want to talk about such nonsense."
Seldon persisted. "Where would it be if it was in the Sacratorium?"
"Even if one was there, I couldnt tell you. I havent been in there since I was a child."
"Would you know if there was a special place, a hidden place?"
"Theres the Elders aerie. Only Elders go there, but theres nothing there."
"Have you ever been there?"
"No, of course not."
"Then how do you know?"
"I dont know that theres no pomegranate tree there. I dont know that theres no laser-organ there. I dont know that theres no item of a million different kinds there. Does my lack of knowledge of their absence show they are all present?"
For the moment, Seldon had nothing to say.
A ghost of a smile broke through Mycelium Seventy-Twos look of concern. He said, "Thats scholars reasoning. Im not an easy man to tackle, you see. Just the same, I wouldnt advise you to try to get up into the Elders aerie. I dont think youd like what would happen if they found a tribesman inside.--Well. Best of the Dawn to you." And he rose suddenly--without warning--and hurried away.
Seldon looked after him, rather surprised. "What made him rush off like that?"
"I think," said Dors, "its because someone is approaching."
And someone was. A tall man in an elaborate white kirtle, crossed by an even more elaborate and subtly glittering red sash, glided solemnly toward them. He had the unmistakable look of a man with authority and the even more unmistakable look of one who is not pleased.
第五十二章
　　谢顿的眼睛很快瞟了一下。坐在他右边的男士稍显瘦削，而且似乎相当年长。
他有一时深褐色的眼珠，以及一身黝黑的皮肤。谢顿可以确定，假如他未曾接受脱毛手术，他一定会有一头黑发。
他再度面向前方，开始寻思：这位兄弟的外表相当特殊。他曾注意过少数几位兄弟，他们的个子都不算矮，而且肤色很淡，有着蓝色或灰色的眼珠。当然，他见过的人还不够多，不足以列出一条通则。
然后，他感到裰服的右手袖子被轻轻碰了一下。谢顿迟疑地转过头去，发觉眼前出现一张卡片，上面写着一行淡淡的字迹：“外族人，小心！”
谢顿吓了一跳，自然而然伸手去摸人皮帽。此时，身旁那位男士做出一组无声的口型：“头发。”
谢顿摸到了，原来太阳穴处有一绺短发露出来。刚才不知什么时候，他一定扯到了这顶人皮帽。他尽可能谨慎地赶紧将它向下拉，然后装作好像是在摸头，用手在附近探了探，以确定人皮帽已回到原位。
他向右转身，对邻座轻轻点了点头，以唇语说了声：“谢谢你。”
邻座那人微微一笑，改用正常的声音说：“去圣堂吗？”
谢顿点了点头：“对，正要去。”
“很容易猜到。我也一样，我们要不要一块下车？”他的笑容相当友善。
“我带着我的……我的……”
“你的女人。那么，三个人一块吧？”
谢顿不知道该如何回应。他很快向另一侧望了望，发觉铎丝的眼睛已转向正前方。她的态度完全符合一位姐妹该有的举止——对男性的交谈毫无反应，这是符合一位姐妹身份的态度。然而，谢顿感到左膝被轻拍了一下，他把它的意思（也许没有什么正当理由）诠释为：“没关系。”
无论如何，礼数使他自然而然认同这一点。于是他说：“好，当然好。”
他们之间并未再做任何交谈。不久，方向指示牌显示圣堂刮了，那位麦曲生友人便起身准备下车。
重力公交车在圣堂广场做了一个大转弯，画出一个很大的圆形轨迹。车子停妥后，众多乘客纷纷下车。男士挤到前面先行走出车门，女士们则跟在后面。
这位麦曲生人由于上了年纪，声音有点沙哑，不过口气十分快活。他说：“现在吃午餐是早了点，我的……朋友们。不过相信我，要不了多久就会非常拥挤。你们愿不愿意现在就买点简单的食物，然后在外面吃？我对这一带很熟，我知道一个好地方。”
谢顿疑心这是个圈套，专门诱骗无知的外族人购买什么特别差劲或昂贵的东西。不过，他决定冒一次险。
“你实在太好了。”他说，“我们对这个地方一点也不熟，我们很高兴有你当向导。”
他们在一个露天小摊买了午餐——三明治与一种看来像是牛奶的饮料。既然天气很好，而且他们又是游客，所以那位麦曲生老者建议，三人一同走到圣堂广场，在户外将午餐解决，这样有助于他们熟悉周围的环境。
当他们拿着午餐，一路向前走的时候，谢顿注意到圣堂类似一个缩小许多倍的皇宫，周围的广场仿佛是个具体而微缩的御苑。他几乎不能相信麦曲生人竟会崇拜皇室建筑，或是做出除了憎恨它、轻视它之外的任何行为。然而，文化上的吸引力显然无可抵御。
“它真漂亮。”那位麦曲生人带着明显的骄傲说。
“是啊，”谢顿说，“它在白昼之下多么灿烂耀眼。”
“周围的广场，”他说，“是模仿我们黎明世界上的政府广场建造的……事实上，是缩小很多的仿制品。”
“你见过皇宫周围的御苑吗？”谢顿小心翼翼地问。
那麦曲生人察觉到了这句话的含意，但是似乎一点也不生气。“他们也是尽可能仿照黎明世界。”
谢顿心里全然不信，但什么也没说。
他们来到一个半圆形的白色石椅旁，它也像圣堂一样在日光下闪闪发亮。
“太好了，”这位麦曲生人的黑眼珠闪耀着喜悦的光彩，“没有人占据我的地盘。我将它称为我的，只因为它是我最心爱的座位。从这里穿过树木看出去，可以见到圣堂边墙的美丽景观。请坐下来，它并不冰冷，我向你保证。还有你的同伴，也欢迎她坐下。她是一名外族女子，我知道，因而拥有不同的习俗。她……她若想说话可以随意。”
铎丝狠狠瞪了他一眼，然后才坐下来。
谢顿明白他们大概会跟这位麦曲生老者待一会儿，于是伸出手来说：“我叫哈里，我的女伴名叫铎丝，只是我们不用号码。”
“各人自有他自己……或她自己……的规矩。”对方以大方的口气说，“我是菌丝七二，我们是个大支族。”
“菌丝？”谢顿带着点犹豫说。
“你似乎很惊讶。”菌丝说，“那么我猜想，你只遇见过那些长老家族的人。诸如云朵、阳光、星光之类的名字——全都是天象。”
“我必须承认……”谢顿的话只说了一半。
“嗯。现在见一见低下阶层的人吧。我们从土地上，以及我们栽培的微生物中撷取我们的名字，它们尊严无比。”
“完全同意，”谢顿说，“再次谢谢你在重力公交车上帮我解决……问题。”
“听着，”菌丝七二说，“我帮你免除了许多麻烦。假使一位姐妹在我之前看到你。她无疑将发出尖叫，旁边的兄弟们就会把你推下公交车——也许甚至不等它停下来。”
铎丝往前倾身，以便让视线越过谢顿。“你自己又为何没有这种反应？”
“我？我对外族人没有敌意，我是一位学者。”
“学者？”
“我们支族中的第一个。我就读于圣堂学院，而且成绩很好。我对一切古代艺术都有研究，此外我还有许可证，可以进入外族图书馆，那里收藏着外族人的胶卷书和传统书。我能随心所欲阅读任何胶卷书，或是阅读任何一本传统书。我们甚至有一间计算机化的图书馆，而我也能使用。这样做有助于开拓心灵，我不介意见到一点头发露出来。我看过许多次留着头发男人的照片，还有女人的。”他瞥了铎丝一眼。
他们默默吃了一会儿午餐，然后谢顿说：“我注意到每位进出圣堂的兄弟，身上都披挂着一条红色肩带。”
“喔，没错。”菌丝七二说，“从左肩垂下来，在腰际右侧环绕一圈，通常都有非常别致的刺绣。”
“那是为什么？”
“它称为‘和带’，象征进入圣堂所感到的喜悦，以及为保护它而甘愿喷洒的鲜血。”
“鲜血？”铎丝皱着眉头说。
“只是一种象征，我从未真正听说有什么人血溅圣堂。此外，这里也没什么喜悦，主要都是对‘失落世界’的恸哭、悲叹，或是顶礼膜拜。”他的音调降低，并且变得柔和，“非常愚蠢。”
铎丝说：“你不是一位……一位信徒？”
“我是一位学者。”菌丝带着明显的骄傲说。当他咧嘴而笑时，他的脸孔皱成一团，使得老态更加明显。谢顿发觉自己对此人的年纪感到好奇，数个世纪？不，他们已经排除这个假设。那是不可能的，然而……
“你有多大岁数？”谢顿不知不觉脱口问道。
对于这个问题，菌丝七二毫不介意，回答也未显出任何迟疑。“六十七。”
谢顿非要追根究底：“我听说你们族人相信，在极早的时代，每个人都能活好几世纪。”
菌丝七二以怪异的神情望着谢顿：“你是怎么知道的？一定有人口无遮拦……但那是真的，的确有这种信仰。只有天真的人才会相信，可是长老们却鼓励这种信仰，因为它能显出我们的优越。事实上，我们的平均寿命确实高于其他地方，因为我们吃得比较营养，可是活到一个世纪的实在少之又少。”
“我猜你并不认为麦曲生人比较优越。”谢顿说。
菌丝七二说：“麦曲生人没什么问题，他们当然绝非拙劣。然而，我认为所有人都是平等的——甚至包括女人在内。”他在补充这句话时，朝铎丝的方向望了一眼。
“而我认为，”谢顿说，“你们族人同意这点的不会太多。”
“你们族人同意的也不会太多。”菌丝七二带着一丝愤恨应道，“不过我对此深信不疑——一位学者理当如此。外族人所有的伟大文学作品，我全部通过投影甚至肉眼读过。我了解你们的文化，还写过这方面的文章。我可以自在地和你们坐在这里，就好像你们是……我们的一员。”
铎丝略显唐突地说：“听你的口气，好像以了解外族人的种种而自豪。你到麦曲生外面旅行过吗？”
菌丝七二似乎向后退了一点：“没有。”
“为什么不去呢？那样你会对我们更加了解。”
“我会觉得不对劲，我必须戴一顶假发，那令我感到羞愧。”
铎丝说：“为何要戴假发？你可以光着头啊。”
“不行，”菌丝七二说，“我才不会那么傻，否则我将被所有拥有毛发的人欺负。”
“欺负？为什么？”铎丝说，“不论是在川陀各个角落，或是其他任何一个世界上，随处都能见到许多天生的秃子。”
“我的父亲就相当秃，”谢顿叹了一声，“而我想在未来几十年内，我也会变成秃头。我的头发现在就不怎么浓密。”
“那不是光头，”菌丝七二说，“你们有周围一圈毛发，还有眼睛上面的。我的意思是光秃秃——完全没有毛发。”
“全身都没有吗？”铎丝很感兴趣。
这回菌丝七二看来真生气了，他什么也没说。
谢顿急着想将话题拉回来，他说：“告诉我，菌丝七二，外族人能以旁观者的身份进入圣堂吗？”
菌丝七二猛力摇了摇头：“绝对不行，它的门只为黎明之子而开。”
铎丝说：“只有黎明之子？”
菌丝七二不以为意地说：“嗯，你们是外族人。只有在某些特定的日子和时辰，黎明之女方可进入。规定就是这样，我并没说我也赞同。如果由我做主，我会说：‘进去吧，玩个尽兴。’事实上，我自己会排在最后。”
“你从来没进去过吗？”
“在我小的时候，父母曾经带我去过。可是——”他摇了摇头，“里面只有一些凝视典籍的人，他们诵读其中的章句，为古老的日子叹息、流泪。气氛非常沉闷，你不能跟人交谈，你不能笑出声来，你甚至不能望着别人。你的心灵必须完全放在失落世界上，完完全全。”他挥了挥手，表示无法认同。“我可不吃这一套。我是一位学者，我要整个世界对我开放。”
“说得好，”谢顿发觉机会终于出现，“我们有同感。我们两人也是学者，铎丝和我。”
“我知道。”菌丝七二说。
“你知道？你怎么知道？”
“你们一定是。获准进入麦曲生的外族人，仅限于帝国官员、外交使节和重要的商人，此外就是学者。而在我看来，你们有学者的长相。这就是我对你们感兴趣的原因，物以类聚嘛。”他露出开怀的笑容。
“你猜得真准。我是个数学家，铎丝是历史学家，你呢？”
“我的专长是——文化。我读过外族人所有的伟大文学作品：黎叟尔、曼通、诺维葛……”
“我们则读过你们族人的伟大作品。比如说，我曾经读过你们的典籍——有关失落世界的记述。”
菌丝七二惊讶得张大眼睛，橄榄色的皮肤似乎稍微褪色。“你读过？怎么会？在哪里？”
“在我们大学里，我们有些副本。只要获得允许，我们就能阅读。”
“典籍的副本？”
“没错。”
“我怀疑长老们是否知道这件事？”
谢顿说：“我还读过有关机仆的记载。”
“机仆？”
“是的。所以我才会希望能进入圣堂，我想看看那个机仆。”（铎丝轻踢谢顿的足踝，但他并未理会。）
菌丝七二不安地说：“我不相信这种事，有学问的人都不相信。”但他四下东张西望，仿佛害怕有人偷听。
谢顿说：“我读到一段记载，说是有个机仆仍在圣堂里面。”
菌丝七二说：“我不想讨论这些无稽之谈。”
谢顿毫不放松：“假使它在圣堂里面，它会在什么地方？”
“即使里面真有一个，我也无法告诉你什么，我只在小时候进去过。”
“你可知道里面是否有个特别的地方，一个隐秘的场所？”
“有个长老阁，只有长老才能去，可是那里什么也没有。”
“你去过那里吗？”
“没有，当然没有。”
“那你又怎么知道？”
“我不知道那里没有石榴树，我不知道那里没有激光风琴，我不知道那里没有一百万种东西。我不知道它们不存在，是否代表它们全都存在？”
一时之间，谢顿无言以对。
菌丝七二忧虑的脸上闪过一丝飘忽的笑容。他说：“那是学者的论证方式，你看，我不是个容易对付的人。无论如何，我还是建议你别试图上长老阁去。如果他们在里面发现一个外族人，我想你不会喜欢那种后果。好啦，愿黎明与你同在。”
他突然起身——毫无预示——然后匆匆离去。
谢顿望着他的背影，心中感到相当惊讶：“什么东西把他吓得落荒而逃？”
“我想，”铎丝说，“是因为有人来了。”
的确有人来了。那人身材高大，穿着一件精致的白色裰服，斜挂着一条更为精致而且隐隐生辉的红色肩带。他踏着严肃的步伐走近他们，脸上显现出不容置疑的权威，以及更加不容置疑的不悦神色。
Chapter 53

Hari Seldon rose as the new Mycogenian approached. He hadnt the slightest idea whether that was the appropriate polite behavior, but he had the distinct feeling it would do no harm. Dors Venabili rose with him and carefully kept her eyes lowered.
The other stood before them. He too was an old man, but more subtly aged than Mycelium Seventy-Two. Age seemed to lend distinction to his still-handsome face. His bald head was beautifully round and his eyes were a startling blue, contrasting sharply with the bright all-but-glowing red of his sash.
The newcomer said, "I see you are tribespeople." His voice was more high-pitched than Seldon had expected, but he spoke slowly, as though conscious of the weight of authority in every word he uttered.
"So we are," said Seldon politely but firmly. He saw no reason not to defer to the others position, but he did not intend to abandon his own.
"Your names?"
"I am Hari Seldon of Helicon. My companion is Dors Venabili of Cinna. And yours, man of Mycogen?"
The eyes narrowed in displeasure, but he too could recognize an air of authority when he felt it.
"I am Skystrip Two," he said, lifting his head higher, "an Elder of the Sacratorium. And your position, tribesman?"
"We," said Seldon, emphasizing the pronoun, "are scholars of Streeling University. I am a mathematician and my companion is a historian and we are here to study the ways of Mycogen."
"By whose authority?"
"By that of Sunmaster Fourteen, who greeted us on our arrival."
Skystrip Two fell silent for a moment and then a small smile appeared on his face and he took on an air that was almost benign. He said, "The High Elder. I know him well."
"And so you should," said Seldon blandly. "Is there anything else, Elder?"
"Yes." The Elder strove to regain the high ground. "Who was the man who was with you and who hurried away when I approached?"
Seldon shook his head, "We never saw him before, Elder, and know nothing about him. We encountered him purely by accident and asked about the Sacratorium."
"What did you ask him?"
"Two questions, Elder. We asked if that building was the Sacratorium and if tribespeople were allowed to enter it. He answered in the affirmative to the first question and in the negative to the second."
"Quite so. And what is your interest in the Sacratorium?"
"Sir, we are here to study the ways of Mycogen and is not the Sacratorium the heart and brain of Mycogen?"
"It is entirely ours and reserved for us."
"Even if an Elder--the High Elder--would arrange for permission in view of our scholarly function?"
"Have you indeed the High Elders permission?"
Seldon hesitated the slightest moment while Dorss eyes lifted briefly to look at him sideways. He decided he could not carry off a lie of this magnitude. "No," he said, "not yet."
"Or ever," said the Elder. "You are here in Mycogen by authority, but even the highest authority cannot exert total control over the public. We value our Sacratorium and the populace can easily grow excited over the presence of a tribesperson anywhere in Mycogen but, most particularly, in the vicinity of the Sacratorium. It would take one excitable person to raise a cry of Invasion! and a peaceful crowd such as this one would be turned into one that would be thirsting to tear you apart. I mean that quite literally. For your own good, even if the High Elder has shown you kindness, leave. Now!"
"But the Sacratorium--" said Seldon stubbornly, though Dors was pulling gently at his kirtle.
"What is there in the Sacratorium that can possibly interest you?" said the Elder. "You see it now. There is nothing for you to see in the interior."
"There is the robot," said Seldon.
The Elder stared at Seldon in shocked surprise and then, bending to bring his lips close to Seldons ear, whispered harshly, "Leave now or I will raise the cry of Invasion! myself. Nor, were it not for the High Elder, would I give you even this one chance to leave."
And Dors, with surprising strength, nearly pulled Seldon off his feet as she stepped hastily away, dragging him along until he caught his balance and stepped quickly after her.

第五十三章
　　那位麦曲生人一走近，哈里•谢顿便站起来。至于这是不是适宜的礼貌举动，他心中没有丝毫概念，不过他很清楚地知道，这样做并无任何害处。铎丝•凡纳比里跟着他起身，小心翼翼地保持着下垂的目光。
对方站在他们两人前面。他也是一名老者，却比菌丝七二更不容易看出年龄。
岁月似乎使他依然英俊的脸庞显得更高贵。他的光头浑圆美观，眼珠是惊人的湛蓝色，与亮得几乎冒火的红色肩带形成强烈对比。
来人说道：“我看得出你们是外族人。”他的声音比谢顿预料中更为高亢，不过他说得很慢，仿佛意识到吐出的每个字都具有权威。
“我们的确是。”谢顿以客气而坚定的语气说。他看不出有任何理由不该尊重对方，却也没打算委屈自己。
“你们的姓名？”
“我是来自赫利肯的哈里•谢顿，我的同伴是来自锡纳的铎丝•凡纳比里。你呢，麦曲生的先生？”
那人不悦地眯起眼睛，不过他也感受到了对方的威严态度。
“我是天纹二，”他将头抬高一些，“圣堂的长老之一。你的身份为何，外族男子？”
“我们，”谢顿刻意强调这个代名词，“是川陀大学的学者。我是个数学家，我的同伴是历史学家，我们前来研究麦曲生的风土民情。”
“经由谁的许可？”
“经由日主十四的许可，我们抵达时他曾亲自迎接。”
天纹二陷入沉默好一会儿，然后他脸上出现几分笑容，态度几乎变得和蔼可亲起来。他说：“元老啊，我跟他很熟。”
“理当如此，”谢顿以温和的语气说，“还有什么事吗，长老？”
“是的。”这位长老极力想要扳回优势，“刚才跟你们在一起，当我走近时匆匆离去的是谁？”
谢顿摇了摇头。“我们以前从未见过他，长老，对他一无所知。我们遇到他纯粹是巧合，只是向他询问有关圣堂的事。”
“你问他些什么？”
“两个问题，长老。我们问这座建筑是不是圣堂，还有它是否准许外族人进入。他对第一个问题的回答是肯定的，第二个则是否定的。”
“相当正确。你对圣堂哪方面还有兴趣？”
“阁下，我们来此是要研究麦曲生的风土民情。圣堂难道不是麦曲生的大脑和心脏吗？”
“它完全是我们的，专门保留给我们。”
“若是某位长老或元老，看在我们做学问的分上，而特许我们进去呢？”
“你真得到元老的许可了吗？”
谢顿迟疑了一下，铎丝抬起眼帘，迅速从旁望了他一眼。他判定自己无法扯这么大的谎，于是说：“不，还没有。”
“或者永远不会。”这位长老说，“你们虽然获得许可来麦曲生，可是就连最高当局也无法绝对控制民众。我们珍惜我们的圣堂——不论在麦曲生哪个角落出现一个外族人，都很容易引起大众的激动情绪，尤其是在圣堂附近。只要有个容易冲动的人高喊一声‘侵略！’像这样一群平和的群众就会变成一群猛兽，非得将你碎尸万段才肯罢休，我这样说绝不夸张。即使元老待你很亲善，为了你自己好，你还是走吧。立刻！”
“可是圣堂……”谢顿继续顽固地说，不过铎丝却在轻扯他的裰服。
“圣堂里面究竟有什么能引起你的兴趣？”那位长老说，“现在你已经看到它了，里面没有任何值得你看的东西。”
“有个机仆。”谢顿说。
长老惊骇万分地瞪着谢顿。然后他弯下腰来，将嘴巴凑到谢顿的耳边，严厉地悄声说道：“立刻离开，否则我会自己高喊那声‘侵略！’要不是看在元老的分上，我甚至连这个机会都不会给你。”
此时铎丝展现惊人的力量，拉着谢顿急步离去，几乎使他站立不稳。她一路拖着他前进，直到他恢复平衡，快步跟在她后面为止。
Chapter 54
It was over breakfast the next morning, not sooner, that Dors took up the subject--and in a way that Seldon found most wounding. She said, "Well, that was a pretty fiasco yesterday."
Seldon, who had honestly thought he had gotten away with it without comment, looked sullen. "What made it a fiasco?"
"Driven out is what we were. And for what? What did we gain?"
"Only the knowledge that there is a robot in there."
"Mycelium Seventy-Two said there wasnt."
"Of course he said that. Hes a scholar--or thinks he is--and what he doesnt know about the Sacratorium would probably fill that library he goes to. You saw the Elders reaction."
"I certainly did."
"He would not have reacted like that if there was no robot inside. He was horrified we knew."
"Thats just your guess, Hari. And even if there was, we couldnt get in."
"We could certainly try. After breakfast, we go out and buy a sash for me, one of those obiahs. I put it on, keep my eyes devoutly downward, and walk right in."
"Skincap and all? Theyll spot you in a microsecond."
"No, they wont. Well go into the library where all the tribespeople data is kept. Id like to see it anyway. From the library, which is a Sacratorium annex, I gather, there will probably be an entrance into the Sacratorium."
"Where you will be picked up at once."
"Not at all. You heard what Mycelium Seventy-Two had to say. Everyone keeps his eyes down and meditates on their great Lost World, Aurora. No one looks at anyone else. It would probably be a grievous breach of discipline to do so. Then Ill find the Elders aerie--"
"Just like that?"
"At one point, Mycelium Seventy-Two said he would advise me not to try to get up into the Elders aerie. Up. It must be somewhere in that tower of the Sacratorium, the central tower."
Dors shook her head. "I dont recall the mans exact words and I dont think you do either. Thats a terribly weak foundation to-- Wait." She stopped suddenly and frowned.
"Well?" said Seldon.
"There is an archaic word aerie that means a dwelling place on high. "
"Ah! There you are. You see, weve learned some vital things as the result of what you call a fiasco. And if I can find a living robot thats twenty thousand years old and if it can tell me--"
"Suppose that such a thing exists, which passes belief, and that you find it, which is not very likely, how long do you think you will be able to talk to it before your presence is discovered?"
"I dont know, but if I can prove it exists and if I can find it, then Ill think of some way to talk to it. Its too late for me to back out now under any circumstances. Hummin should have left me alone when I thought there was no way of achieving psychohistory. Now that it seems there may be, I wont let anything stop me--short of being killed."
"The Mycogenians may oblige, Hari, and you cant run that risk."
"Yes, I can. Im going to try."
"No, Hari. I must look after you and I cant let you."
"You must let me. Finding a way to work out psychohistory is more important than my safety. My safety is only important because I may work out psychohistory. Prevent me from doing so and your task loses its meaning.--Think about it."
Hari felt himself infused with a renewed sense of purpose. Psychohistory--his nebulous theory that he had, such a short while ago, despaired ever of proving--loomed larger, more real. Now he had to believe that it was possible; he could feel it in his gut. The pieces seemed to be falling together and although he couldnt see the whole pattern yet, he was sure the Sacratorium would yield another piece to the puzzle.
"Then Ill go in with you so I can pull you out, you idiot, when the time comes."
"Women cant enter."
"What makes me a woman? Only this gray kirtle. You cant see my breasts under it. I dont have a womans style hairdo with the skincap on. I have the same washed, unmarked face a man has. The men here dont have stubble. All I need is a white kirtle and a sash and I can enter. Any Sister could do it if she wasnt held back by a taboo. I am not held back by one."
"Youre held back by me. I wont let you. Its too dangerous."
"No more dangerous for me than for you."
"But I must take the risk."
"Then so must I. Why is your imperative greater than mine?"
"Because--" Seldon paused in thought.
"Just tell yourself this," said Dors, her voice hard as rock. "I wont let you go there without me. If you try, I will knock you unconscious and tie you up. If you dont like that, then give up any thought of going alone."
Seldon hesitated and muttered darkly. He gave up the argument, at least for now.
第五十四章
　　一夜无话，直到第二天上午吃早餐的时候，铎丝才重拾这个话题——用的是谢顿感到最伤人的说法。
她说：“唉，昨天真是一败涂地。”
谢顿面色凝重，他原本以为已躲过批判：“为什么说一败涂地？”
“我们的下场是被轰出来。为了什么？我们又得到些什么？”
“我们只知道那里面有个机器人。”
“菌丝七二说没这回事。”
“他当然那样说。他是个学者，或者自认为是个学者。有关圣堂的点点滴滴，他不知道的也许能装满他常去的那间图书馆。你看到那个长老的反应了。”
“当然看到了。”
“假使里面没有机器人，他不会有那种反应。我们的情报把他吓坏了。”
“那只是你的猜想，哈里。即使真有其事，我们也无法进去。”
“我们可以试一试。吃完早餐我们就出去，先买一条肩带，就是所谓的和带。我把它挂在身上，目光保持虔敬地向下，就这样走进去。”
“人皮帽和其他一切呢？他们会在一微秒内认出你来。”
“不，他们不会的。我们先走进那间保存外族人数据的图书馆，反正我也想去看看。那间图书馆是圣堂的附属建筑，我推测里而或许有进入圣堂的入口……”
“你进圣堂后会立刻遭到逮捕。”
“绝对不会。你也听到菌丝七二是怎么说的，每个人都保持目光向下，冥思他们那个伟大的失落世界奥罗拉。没有人会望向其他人，说不定那是严重违反戒律的行为。然后，我就能找到长老阁……”
“那么答易？”
“在谈话中，菌丝七二曾说建议我别试图上长老阁去。‘上’！它一定是在圣堂的高塔中，那个中央高塔。”
铎丝摇了摇头：“我不确定那人使用的是哪些字眼，我想你也记不清了。那实在是太过微弱的根据……慢着。”她突然打住，同时皱起眉头。
“怎么了？”谢顿说。
“有个古老的字眼‘阁’，意思是位于高处的住所。”
“啊！我就说吧。你看，从你所谓的一败涂地中，我们获悉了一些重要的事。如果我能找到一个已经两万岁的活生生的机器人，如果它能告诉我……”
“假设这种东西果真存在——这已经难以置信；再假设你能找到它——这又是不大可能的事。在这两个前提下，你认为在自己的行踪被人发现之前，可以跟它谈多久？”
“我不知道。可是如果我能证明它存在，如果我又能找到它，那我总会想办法和它交谈。如今不论在任何情况下，我想打退堂鼓都为时已晚。在我认为心理史学根本无法建立时，夫铭就该放我一马。现在似乎有了眉目，任何事物都无法阻止我——除非将我杀了。”
“麦曲生人可能会被迫那样做，哈里。你不能冒这种险。”
“不，我可以冒险，我要去试试看。”
“不，哈里。我必须照顾你，我不能让你去。”
“你一定要让我去。找到一个建立心理史学的方法，比我自身的安全更为重要。我的安全之所以重要，是因为我或许能建立心理史学。若是阻止我这么做，你的工作就失去意义——好好想一想。”
谢顿觉得一股全新的使命感自体内升起。心理史学——他那模糊不清的理论，不久之前，他还认为绝无成功的希望——隐隐约约变得越来越大，越来越真实。现在，他必须相信它是可能的，他打心眼里感觉得到。拼图的碎片似乎开始聚在一起，虽然他还无法看出整体图样，然而，他确定圣堂能够提供另一块碎片。
“我要和你一起进去，这样我才能及时将你这个白痴拉出来。”
“女人是不准入内的。”
“什么东西让我看来像个女人？只是这件裰服罢了。穿着这种服装，你看不见我的胸部；戴上人皮帽之后，我头上也小再有女人的发型。我的脸洗得干干净净，未施任何脂粉，跟男人没什么两样，而且这里的男人连短髭都没有。我需要的只是一件白色裰服和一条肩带，然后我就可以进去。要不是受到禁忌的限制，每位姐妹都能这么做，我可不受任何禁忌限制。”
“你受我的限制，我不让你那样做，太危险了。”
“对我和对你一样危险。”
“但我一定要冒这个盼。”
“那么我也一样，为什么你的命令胜过我的？”
“因为……”谢顿突然住口，陷入沉思之中。
“你不如这样想，”铎丝的语气坚如磐石，“我不会让你不带我同去，假如你想尝试，我会把你打昏，再把你绑起来。若是你不喜欢那样，就别再有独自前往的念头。”
谢顿迟疑不决，闷闷不乐地嘀咕了几句。他放弃了争论，至少暂时如此。
Chapter 55
The sky was almost cloudless, but it was a pale blue, as though wrapped in a high thin mist. That, thought Seldon, was a good touch, but suddenly he missed the sun itself. No one on Trantor saw the planets sun unless he or she went Upperside and even then only when the natural cloud layer broke. Did native Trantorians miss the sun? Did they give it any thought? When one of them visited another world where a natural sun was in view, did he or she stare, half-blinded, at it with awe?
Why, he wondered, did so many people spend their lives not trying to find answers to questions--not even thinking of questions to begin with? Was there anything more exciting in life than seeking answers?
His glance shifted to ground level. The wide roadway was lined with low buildings, most of them shops. Numerous individual ground-cars moved in both directions, each hugging the right side. They seemed like a collection of antiques, but they were electrically driven and quite soundless. Seldon wondered if "antique" was always a word to sneer at. Could it be that silence made up for slowness? Was there any particular hurry to life, after all?
There were a number of children on the walkways and Seldons lips pressed together in annoyance. Clearly, an extended life span for the Mycogenians was impossible unless they were willing to indulge in infanticide. The children of both sexes (though it was hard to tell the boys from the girls) wore kirtles that came only a few inches below the knee, making the wild activity of childhood easier.
The children also still had hair, reduced to an inch in length at most, but even so the older ones among them had hoods attached to their kirtles and wore them raised, hiding the top of the head altogether. It was as though they were getting old enough to make the hair seem a trifle obscene--or old enough to be wishing to hide it, in longing for the day of rite of passage when they were depilated.
A thought occurred to Seldon. He said, "Dors, when youve been out shopping, who paid, you or the Raindrop women?"
"I did of course. The Raindrops never produced a credit tile. But why should they? What was being bought was for us, not for them."
"But you have a Trantorian credit tile--a tribeswoman credit tile."
"Of course, Hari, but there was no problem. The people of Mycogen may keep their own culture and ways of thought and habits of life as they wish. They can destroy their cephalic hair and wear kirtles. Nevertheless, they must use the worlds credits. If they dont, that would choke off commerce and no sensible person would want to do that. The credits nerve, Hari." She held up her hand as though she was holding an invisible credit tile.
"And they accepted your credit tile?"
"Never a peep out of them. And never a word about my skincap. Credits sanitize everything."
"Well, thats good. So I can buy--"
"No, Ill do the buying. Credits may sanitize everything, but they more easily sanitize a tribeswoman. Theyre so used to paying women little or no attention that they automatically pay me the same.--And heres the clothing store Ive been using."
"Ill wait out here. Get me a nice red sash--one that looks impressive."
"Dont pretend youve forgotten our decision. Ill get two. And another white kirtle also ... to my measurements."
"Wont they think it odd that a woman would be buying a white kirtle?"
"Of course not. Theyll assume Im buying it for a male companion who happens to be my size. Actually, I dont think theyll bother with any assumptions at all as long as my credit tile is good."
Seldon waited, half-expecting someone to come up and greet him as a tribesman or denounce him as one--more likely--but no one did. Those who passed him did so without a glance and even those who glanced in his direction moved on seemingly untouched. He was especially nervous about the gray kirtles--the women--walking by in pairs or, even worse, with a man. They were downtrodden, unnoticed, snubbed. How better to gain a brief notoriety than by shrieking at the sight of a tribesman? But even the women moved on.
Theyre not expecting to see a tribesman, Seldon thought, so they dont see one.
That, he decided, augured well for their forthcoming invasion of the Sacratorium. How much less would anyone expect to see tribespeople there and how much more effectively would they therefore fail to see them! He was in fairly good humor when Dors emerged.
"You have everything?"
"Absolutely."
"Then lets go back to the room, so you can change." The white kirtle did not fit her quite as well as the gray one did. Obviously, she could not have tried it on or even the densest shopkeeper would have been struck with alarm.
"How do I look, Hari?" she asked.
"Exactly like a boy," said Seldon. "Now lets try the sash ... or obiah. I had better get used to calling it that."
Dors, without her skincap, was shaking out her hair gratefully. She said sharply, "Dont put it on now. Were not going to parade through Mycogen with the sash on. The last thing we want to do is call attention to ourselves."
"No, no. I just want to see how it goes on."
"Well, not that one. This one is better quality and more elaborate."
"Youre right, Dors. Ive got to gather in what attention there is. I dont want them to detect you as a woman."
"Im not thinking of that, Hari. I just want you to look pretty."
"A thousand thanks, but thats impossible, I suspect. Now, lets see, how does this work?"
Together, Hari and Dors practiced putting their obiahs on and taking them off, over and over again, until they could do it in one fluid motion. Dors taught Hari how to do it, as she had seen a man doing it the day before at the Sacratorium.
When Hari praised her for her acute observations, she blushed and said, "Its really nothing, Hari, just something I noticed."
Hari replied, "Then youre a genius for noticing."
Finally satisfied, they stood well apart, each surveying the other. Haris obiah glittered, a bright red dragonlike design standing out against a paler field of similar hue. Dorss was a little less bold, had a simple thin line down the center, and was very light in color.
"There," she said, "just enough to show good taste." She took it off.
"Now," said Seldon, "we fold it up and it goes into one of the inner pockets. I have my credit tile--Hummins, really--and the key to this place in this one and here, on the other side, the Book."
"The Book? Should you be carrying it around?"
"I must. Im guessing that anyone going to the Sacratorium ought to have a copy of the Book with him. They may intone passages or have readings. If necessary, well share the Book and maybe no one will notice. Ready?"
"Ill never be ready, but Im going with you."
"It will be a tedious trip. Will you check my skincap and make sure no hair shows this time? And dont scratch your head."
"I wont. You look all right."
"So do you."
"You also look nervous."
And Seldon said wryly, "Guess why!"
Dors reached out impulsively and squeezed Haris hand, then drew back as if surprised at herself. Looking down, she straightened her white kirtle.
Hari, himself a trifle surprised and peculiarly pleased, cleared his throat and said, "Okay, lets go."
Aerie
ROBOT-- ... A term used in the ancient legends of several worlds for what are more usually called "automata." Robots are described as generally human in shape and made of metal, although some are supposed to have been pseudo-organic in nature. Hari Seldon, in the course of The Flight, is popularly supposed to have seen an actual robot, but that story is of dubious origin. Nowhere in Seldons voluminous writings does he mention robots at all, although ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第五十五章
　　天空几乎万里无云，但天色却是灰蓝色的，仿佛罩在一片高层轻雾中。多美好的画面，谢顿心想，不过他忽然又怀念起太阳。川陀上的人都无法看见太阳，除非他们前往穹顶上，而且即便如此，也必须等到自然云层裂出一道缝。
土生土长的川陀人是否怀念太阳？他们是否想到过它？当他们访问其他世界，抬头便能望见真实的太阳之际，他们是否带着敬畏的心情，凝视着那个炫目的火球？
他感到纳闷，为何那么多人过着庸庸碌碌的日子，从未试图找出许多问题的答案，甚至根本未曾想到那些问题？人生难道还有什么事情，比寻找答案更令人感到振奋？
他又将视线移到水平线上。宽广的道路两侧排列着低矮的建筑，其中大多数是商店。来来往往的个人地面车为数众多，每一辆都紧贴着右侧。它们似乎像一批古董，不过都是电力驱动的，而且几乎安静无声。谢顿不禁怀疑，“古董”难道总是值得嘲笑的词吗？安静是否能弥补慢速的缺点？毕竟，人生又有什么特别需要赶场的呢？
看到人行道上有些儿童，谢顿在心烦意乱中抿紧嘴唇。显然，麦曲生人不可能拥有超长的寿命，除非他们愿意大肆进行杀婴的举动。两种性别的儿童（虽然很难分辨男孩与女孩）都穿着裰服，长度仅达膝盖以下数寸，好让孩童狂放的活动方便些。
那些儿童也都还有头发，顶多不超过两厘米。不过即使如此，较大的儿童在裰服上一律附有兜帽，而且都把它拉上，将头顶完全遮起来。仿佛他们的年龄已经不小，足以使头发看来有点淫秽之意；或者是年龄已经够大，主动希望将头发遮掩，并渴望脱毛手术的成年礼早日来临。
谢顿突然闪过一个念头。他说：“铎丝，你去购物的时候由谁付账，是你还是雨点姐妹？”
“当然是我，雨点姐妹从未掏出信用磁卡。但是她们应该那样做吗？买的东西全是给我们用的，又不是给她们的。”
“但你拥有的是一张川陀信用磁卡，外族女子的信用磁卡。”
“当然，哈里，可是根本没有问题。麦曲生人或许如愿地保持着独有的文化、思考模式和生活习惯，他们可以毁弃头部毛发，并且一律穿着裰服。然而，他们必须使用世界通用的信用点。他们若是拒绝，那会扼杀一切的商业活动，任何理智的人都不会那么做。信用点能使人见钱眼开，哈里。”她举起一只手，仿佛正握着一张隐形信用磁卡。
“所以他们接受你的信用磁卡？”
“他们连看都没看我一眼，对我的人皮帽也从来不予评价。信用点消除了一切疑虑。”
“嗯，那很好。所以我也能买……”
“不，由我来买。信用点或许能消除一切疑虑，但更容易消除对一名外族女子的疑虑。他们习惯了对女性不太注意或毫不注意，所以自然而然对我一视同仁——这家就是我曾经光顾的服装店。”
“我在外面等，帮我买一条好看的红肩带——特别引人注目的。”
“你别假装忘了我们的决定。我会买两条，还会再买一件白色裰服……符合我的尺寸的。”
“一个女人想买一件白色裰服，他们不会认为奇怪吗？”
“当然不会。他们会认为我是帮一位男伴买的，而他的身材刚好和我一样。事实上，只要我的信用磁卡没问题，我想他们根本懒得做任何判定。”
于是谢顿开始等待，心里多少盼望着有人跟他这个外族人打招呼，或者公然抨击他这个外族人——后者其实更有可能，结果这两种人皆末出现。在他面前经过的人都没看他一眼，甚至那些曾朝这个方向望来的人，也似乎无动于衷地继续前进。尤其让他敏感的是那些灰色裰服——那些成双成对行走的女性，而身边有个男伴的更糟。她们是属于受到压制、遭到冷落、不被重视的一群。还有什么举动，比看到一个外族男子后尖叫一声更能引起短暂的侧目？可是就连女性也对他不屑一顾。
他们并未预期看到外族人，谢顿想，所以他们视而不见。
对于两人即将入侵圣堂的行动，他认定这是个好兆头。在那里更不会有人预期见到外族人，因此将对他们两人更加熟视尤睹！
铎丝出来的时候，谢顿的心情相当好。
“买齐了吗？”
“一样不缺。”
“那么我们回去吧，好让你换衣服。”
新买的白色裰服不如灰色那件合身。显然她刚才根本不能试穿，否则即使最愚钝的店主都会吓得不知如何是好。
“我看来怎么样，哈里？”她问道。
“跟一个男生一模一样。”谢顿说，“现在让我们试试肩带……或者该说和带，我最好习惯这样称呼它。”
未戴人皮帽的铎丝正心满意足地甩着头发。她突然说：“不要现在就戴上，我们不准备披挂着肩带游行麦曲生。引人注意是我们最不愿发生的事。”
“不，不。我只是想看看是否合身。”
“好吧，不是那条。这条的质量比较好，而且比较精致。”
“你说得对，铎丝。我必须吸引所有的注意，我不想让他们察觉你是女的。”
“我不是那个意思，哈里，我只是要你看来帅气。”
“感激不尽，但我怀疑那是不可能的。现在，让我们想想看，这究竟该怎样穿戴。”
谢顿与铎丝两人一起练习戴上、摘下和带的动作，试了一次又一次，直到能以流畅的动作一气呵成为止。这回由铎丝担任谢顿的老师，因为昨天她曾在圣堂外看到一名男子的全程动作。
当谢顿称赞她具有敏锐观察力的时候，她红着脸说：“这实在没什么，哈里，不过是我观察到的一件事。”
谢顿答道：“那么，你就是个观察力过人的天才。”
练得纯熟满意之后，他们彼此站得老远，互相审视着对方的穿着。谢顿的和带闪闪发亮，有个鲜红的龙形图案浮现在较淡的同色调背景上。铎丝那条的设计没那么大胆，仅在中央处点缀着一条简单的细纹，而且色调非常浅。“这样，”她说，“足以显示我们的品位不俗。”说完她就将它摘下。
“现在，”谢顿说，“我们把它折叠起来，放进其中一个内袋里。我的信用磁卡——其实是夫铭的——和此地的钥匙在这个内袋，而这里，另一边的内袋是那本典籍。”
“典籍？你要带着它到处跑吗？”
“我必须这么做。我猜任何进入圣堂的人都该随身携带一本典籍，他们可能会吟咏或齐声朗读其中的章句。假使有必要，我们就共享这本典籍，或许没有人会注意到。准备好了吗？”
“准备好是不可能的，但我会跟你一起去。”
“这将是个沉闷的旅程。能否请你检查一下我的人皮帽，确定这次没有头发露出来？记着别抓你的头。”
“我不会的，你看来一切正常。”
“你也是。”
“你看来还有点紧张兮兮。”
谢顿以挖苦的口气说：“猜猜为什么！”
铎丝冲动地伸出手去，紧紧握住谢顿的手，却赶紧抽回来，好像对自己的举动感到惊讶。然后她低下头，将身上的白色裰服拉直。
谢顿自己也有点惊讶，心中又特别高兴，他清了清喉咙，说道：“好啦，我们走吧。”
Chapter 56

They were not noticed.
Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili repeated the trip of the day before and this time no one gave them a second look. Hardly anyone even gave them a first look. On several occasions, they had to tuck their knees to one side to allow someone sitting on an inner seat to get past them and out. When someone got in, they quickly realized they had to move over if there was an inner empty seat. This time they quickly grew tired of the smell of kirtles that were not freshly laundered because they were not so easily diverted by what went on outside. But eventually they were there.
"Thats the library," said Seldon in a low voice.
"I suppose so," said Dors. "At least thats the building that Mycelium Seventy-Two pointed out yesterday."
They sauntered toward it leisurely.
"Take a deep breath," said Seldon. "This is the first hurdle."
The door ahead was open, the light within subdued. There were five broad stone steps leading upward. They stepped onto the lowermost one and waited several moments before they realized that their weight did not cause the steps to move upward. Dors grimaced very slightly and gestured Seldon upward. Together they walked up the stairs, feeling embarrassed on behalf of Mycogen for its backwardness.
Then, through a door, where, at a desk immediately inside was a man bent over the simplest and clumsiest computer Seldon had ever seen. The man did not look up at them. No need, Seldon supposed. White kirtle, bald head--all Mycogenians looked so nearly the same that ones eyes slid off them and that was to the tribespeoples advantage at the moment.
The man, who still seemed to be studying something on the desk, said, "Scholars?"
"Scholars," said Seldon.
The man jerked his head toward a door. "Go in. Enjoy."
They moved inward and, as nearly as they could see, they were the only ones in this section of the library. Either the library was not a popular resort or the scholars were few or--most likely--both.
Seldon whispered, "I thought surely we would have to present some sort of license or permission form and I would have to plead having forgotten it."
"He probably welcomes our presence under any terms. Did you ever see a place like this? If a place, like a person, could be dead, we would be inside a corpse."
Most of the books in this section were print-books like the Book in Seldons inner pocket. Dors drifted along the shelves, studying them. She said, "Old books, for the most part. Part classic. Part worthless."
"Outside books? Non-Mycogen, I mean?"
"Oh yes. If they have their own books, they must be kept in another section. This one is for outside research for poor little self-styled scholars like yesterdays.--This is the reference department and heres an Imperial Encyclopedia ... must be fifty years old if a day ... and a computer." She reached for the keys and Seldon stopped her.
"Wait. Something could go wrong and well be delayed."
He pointed to a discreet sign above a free-standing set of shelves that glowed with the letters TO THE SACR TORIUM. The second A in SACRATORIUM was dead, possibly recently or possibly because no one cared. (The Empire, thought Seldon, was in decay. All parts of it. Mycogen too.)
He looked about. The poor library, so necessary to Mycogenian pride, perhaps so useful to the Elders who could use it to find crumbs to shore up their own beliefs and present them as being those of sophisticated tribespeople, seemed to be completely empty. No one had entered after them.
Seldon said, "Lets step in here, out of eyeshot of the man at the door, and put on our sashes."
And then, at the door, aware suddenly there would be no turning back if they passed this second hurdle, he said, "Dors, dont come in with me."
She frowned. "Why not?"
"Its not safe and I dont want you to be at risk."
"I am here to protect you," she said with soft firmness.
"What kind of protection can you be? I can protect myself, though you may not think it. And Id be handicapped by having to protect you. Dont you see that?"
"You mustnt be concerned about me, Hari," said Dors. "Concern is my part." She tapped her sash where it crossed in the space between her obscured breasts.
"Because Hummin asked you to?"
"Because those are my orders."
She seized Seldons arms just above his elbow and, as always, he was surprised by her firm grip. She said, "Im against this, Hari, but if you feel you must go in, then I must go in too."
"All right, then. But if anything happens and you can wriggle out of it, run. Dont worry about me."
"Youre wasting your breath, Hari. And youre insulting me."
Seldon touched the entrance panel and the portal slid open. Together, almost in unison, they walked through.

第五十六章
第十二部 长老阁
机仆：……与较通行名称“机器人”同义。这个字汇存在于数个世界的古代传说中。
根据记载，机仆一般皆由金属制成，外形酷似人类，不过据说有些机仆的材料为假有机物质。
盛传哈里•谢顿在“逃亡期”中，曾亲眼见到一个真正的机仆。但此轶闻的来源并不可靠。在谢顿浩瀚的著作中．从未提到任何机仆。
不过……
——《银河百科全书》


第五十六章
没有人注意他们。
哈里•谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里重复着昨日的行程，这次没有任何人看他们第二眼，甚至几乎没人看他们一眼。车子好几次靠站的时候，他们必须将膝盖偏向一侧，好让坐在内侧的人走出来。而在有人上车之后，如果内侧还有空位，他们立刻明白应该向内移动。
这一回，他们很快就受不了久未洗涤的裰服发出的气味，因为他们不再那么容易被车外的事物吸引。
无论如何，他们总算抵达了目的地。
“那就是图书馆。”谢顿低声说道。
“我想没错，”铎丝说，“它就是菌丝七二昨天指的那栋建筑。”
他们以悠闲的步伐朝它走去。
“深呼吸一下，”谢顿说，“这是第一道关卡。”
前面的门开着，里面的光线柔和暗淡，门前共有五级宽阔的石阶。他们踏上最低一级，等了好一会儿，才了解他们的重量并未使阶梯上升。铎丝做了一个很小的鬼脸，以手势示意谢顿往上走。
当他们一起走上阶梯时，都为这种落后替麦曲生感到难为情。然后，他们走进一道门，室内近门处摆着一张办公桌，有个男的伏在一台计算机上，那是谢顿见过的最简单、最粗陋的计算机。
那个男的并未抬头看他们。没有必要，谢顿这么想。白色的裰服，光秃的头颅——所有麦曲生人看来几乎都差不多，眼光扫过不会留下任何印象。而在这个节骨眼上，这点成了外族人的有利因素。
那人似乎仍在研究桌上的什么东西。“学者吗？”他问。
“学者。”谢顿答道。
那人突然将头朝一扇门摆了摆：“进去吧，尽情研究。”
他们进去后，在两人目力所极的范围内，他们是图书馆这一区仅有的两个人。
若非这间图书馆不是个热门去处，就是学者为数极少，而更有可能的情况，则是两者同时成立。
谢顿悄声说道：“我本来以为我们得出示某种执照或许可文件，我准备辩称我忘了带。”
“也许不管我们怎么回答，他都会欢迎我们进来。你见过像这样的地方吗？如果地方像人一样也会死亡，那我们就正在一具尸体里面。”
这一区的图书大部分是印刷书，就像谢顿内袋中的那木典籍一样。
铎丝一面沿着书架游走，一面研究其上陈列的书籍。“古书，大多数都是。部分是经典名著，部分则一文不值。”
“外界的书籍——我的意思是说，非麦曲生的？”
“嗖，没错。如果他们有自己的书籍，那些书一定收藏存另一区。本区专供那些可怜的自命学者进行外界研究，比如说昨天那位——这是参考图书部，这里有一套‘帝国百科全书……它一定有五十年的历史，绝少不了……还有一台计算机。”
她伸手想要触动按键，谢顿却阻止她：“别碰它。万一再什么问题，我们会被耽搁。”
他指着一排独立书架上的一个精细标示，上面映着“往圣堂”几个闪亮的字体，其中“圣”字有些笔画暗淡无光，也许是最近才坏的，也可能是因为无人在意。（帝国正在哀败中，谢顿想道，每一部分皆是如此，麦曲生也不例外。）
他四下张望。这间简陋的图书馆对麦曲生的骄傲而言是如此重要不可或缺的一环；对长老们可能极为有用——他们得以从中找到只言片语，用来支撑他们的信仰。然而放眼望去，这里却空荡无人，也没有人跟在他们身后进来。
谢顿说：“让我们待在这里，避开门口那人的视野，把肩带戴上。”
在那扇门前，他突然意识到如果越过这第二道关卡，他们就再也无法回头。他说：“铎丝，别跟我进来。”
她皱起眉头：“为什么？”
“这不安全，我不要你身处险境。”
“我来这里就是要保护你。”她以温柔而坚定的口吻说。
“你能怎么保护我呢？或许你不以为然，但我可以保护自己。如果你在身边，我会为了保护你而缩手缩脚，这点你不明白吗？”
“你绝不要为我担心，哈里，”铎丝说，“担心是我的事。”她拍拍胸脯，落手处是横跨隐约双峰之间的肩带。
“因为夫铭要求你这么做？”
“因为这是我的使命。”
她伸出双手，抓住谢顿双臂。如同往常一样，她坚定的双手令他惊讶不已。她说：“我并不赞成这样做，哈里，但你若是觉得你一定要进去，那我也一定要跟进去。”
“既然这样，好吧！一旦如果发生任何事，而你能逃脱的话，那就赶快跑，不要顾及我。”
“你在白费口舌，哈里，而且你是在侮辱我。”
谢顿按了一下开启触板，那扇门便向一侧滑开。他们两人同时走进，动作几乎完全一致。
Chapter 57

A large room, all the larger because it was empty of anything resembling furniture. No chairs, no benches, no seats of any kind. No stage, no drapery, no decorations.
No lights, merely a uniform illumination of mild, unfocused light. The walls were not entirely blank. Periodically, arranged in spaced fashion at various heights and in no easy repetitive order, there were small, primitive, two-dimensional television screens, all of which were operating. From where Dors and Seldon stood, there was not even the illusion of a third dimension, not a breath of true holovision.
There were people present. Not many and nowhere together. They stood singly and, like the television monitors, in no easy repetitive order. All were white-kirtled, all sashed.
For the most part, there was silence. No one talked in the usual sense. Some moved their lips, murmuring softly. Those who walked did so stealthily, eyes downcast.
The atmosphere was absolutely funereal.
Seldon leaned toward Dors, who instantly put a finger to her lips, then pointed to one of the television monitors. The screen showed an idyllic garden bursting with blooms, the camera panning over it slowly. They walked toward the monitor in a fashion that imitated the others--slow steps, putting each foot down softly.
When they were within half a meter of the screen, a soft insinuating voice made itself heard: "The garden of Antennin, as reproduced from ancient guidebooks and photographs, located in the outskirts of Eos. Note the--"
Dors said in a whisper Seldon had trouble catching over the sound of the set, "It turns on when someone is close and it will turn off if we step away. If were close enough, we can talk under cover, but dont look at me and stop speaking if anyone approaches."
Seldon, his head bent, his hands clasped before him (he had noted that this was a preferred posture), said, "Any moment I expect someone to start wailing."
"Someone might. Theyre mourning their Lost World," said Dors.
"I hope they change the films every once in a while. It would be deadly to always see the same ones."
"Theyre all different," said Dors, her eyes sliding this way and that. "They may change periodically. I dont know."
"Wait!" said Seldon just a hairs breadth too loud. He lowered his voice and said, "Come this way."
Dors frowned, failing to make out the words, but Seldon gestured slightly with his head. Again the stealthy walk, but Seldons footsteps increased in length as he felt the need for greater speed and Dors, catching up, pulled sharply--if very briefly--at his kirtle. He slowed.
"Robots here," he said under the cover of the sound as it came on. The picture showed the corner of a dwelling place with a rolling lawn and a line of hedges in the foreground and three of what could only be described as robots. They were metallic, apparently, and vaguely human in shape.
The recording said, "This is a view, recently constructed, of the establishment of the famous Wendome estate of the third century. The robot you see near the center was, according to tradition, named Bendar and served twenty-two years, according to the ancient records, before being replaced."
Dors said, " Recently constructed, so they must change views."
"Unless theyve been saying recently constructed for the last thousand years."
Another Mycogenian stepped into the sound pattern of the scene and said in a low voice, though not as low as the whisperings of Seldon and Dors, "Greetings, Brothers."
He did not look at Seldon and Dors as he spoke and after one involuntary and startled glance, Seldon kept his head averted. Dors had ignored it all. Seldon hesitated. Mycelium Seventy-Two had said that there was no talking in the Sacratorium. Perhaps he had exaggerated. Then too he had not been in the Sacratorium since he was a child.
Desperately, Seldon decided he must speak. He said in a whisper, "And to you, Brother, greetings."
He had no idea whether that was the correct formula of reply or if there was a formula, but the Mycogenian seemed to find nothing amiss in it. "To you in Aurora," he said.
"And to you," said Seldon and because it seemed to him that the other expected more, he added, "in Aurora," and there was an impalpable release of tension. Seldon felt his forehead growing moist.
The Mycogenian said, "Beautiful! I havent seen this before."
"Skillfully done," said Seldon. Then, in a burst of daring, he added, "A loss never to be forgotten."
The other seemed startled, then said, "Indeed, indeed," and moved away.
Dors hissed, "Take no chances. Dont say what you dont have to."
"It seemed natural. Anyway, this it recent. But those are disappointing robots. They are what I would expect automata to be. I want to see the organic ones--the humanoids."
"If they existed," said Dors with some hesitation, "it seems to me they wouldnt be used for gardening jobs."
"True," said Seldon. "We must find the Elders aerie."
"If that exists. It seems to me there is nothing in this hollow cave but a hollow cave."
"Lets look."
They paced along the wall, passing from screen to screen, trying to wait at each for irregular intervals until Dors clutched Seldons arms. Between two screens were lines marking out a faint rectangle.
"A door," Dors said. Then she weakened the assertion by adding, "Do you think?"
Seldon looked about surreptitiously. It was in the highest degree convenient that, in keeping with the mourning atmosphere, every face, when not fixed on a television monitor, was bent in sad concentration on the floor.
Seldon said, "How do you suppose it would open?"
"An entrance patch."
"I cant make out any."
"Its just not marked out, but theres a slight discoloration there. Do you see it? How many palms? How many times?"
"Ill try. Keep an eye out and kick me if anyone looks in this direction."
He held his breath casually, touched the discolored spot to no avail, and then placed his palm full upon it and pressed.
The door opened silently--not a creak, not a scrape.
Seldon stepped through as rapidly as he could and Dors followed him. The door closed behind them.
"The question is," said Dors, "did anyone see us?"
Seldon said, "Elders must go through this door frequently."
"Yes, but will anyone think we are Elders?"
Seldon waited, then said, "If we were observed and if anyone thought something was wrong, this door would have been flung open again within fifteen seconds of our entering."
"Possibly," said Dors dryly, "or possibly there is nothing to be seen or done on this side of the door and no one cares if we enter."
"That remains to be seen," muttered Seldon.
The rather narrow room they had entered was somewhat dark, but as they stepped farther into it, the light brightened.
There were chairs, wide and comfortable, small tables, several davenports, a deep and tall refrigerator, cupboards.
"If this is the Elders aerie," said Seldon, "the Elders seem to do themselves comfortably, despite the austerity of the Sacratorium itself."
"As would be expected," said Dors. "Asceticism among a ruling class--except for public show--is very rare. Put that down in your notebook for psychohistorical aphorisms." She looked about. "And there is no robot."
Seldon said, "An aerie is a high position, remember, and this ceiling is not. There must be upper storeys and that must be the way." He pointed to a well-carpeted stairway.
He did not advance toward it, however, but looked about vaguely.
Dors guessed what he was seeking. She said, "Forget about elevators. Theres a cult of primitivism in Mycogen. Surely, you havent forgotten that, have you? There would be no elevators and, whats more, if we place our weight at the foot of the stairs, I am quite certain it will not begin moving upward. Were going to have to climb it. Several flights, perhaps."
"Climb it?"
"It must, in the nature of things, lead to the aerie--if it leads anywhere. Do you want to see the aerie or dont you?"
Together they stepped toward the staircase and began the climb. They went up three flights and, as they did, the light level decreased perceptibly and in steady increments. Seldon took a deep breath and whispered, "I consider myself to be in pretty good shape, but I hate this."
"Youre not used to this precise type of physical exertion." She showed no signs of physical distress whatever.
At the top of the third flight the stairs ended and before them was another door.
"And if its locked?" said Seldon, more to himself than to Dors. "Do we try to break it down?"
But Dors said, "Why should it be locked when the lower door was not? If this is the Elders aerie, I imagine theres a taboo on anyone but Elders coming here and a taboo is much stronger than any lock."
"As far as those who accept the taboo are concerned," said Seldon, but he made no move toward the door.
"Theres still time to turn back, since you hesitate," said Dors. "In fact, I would advise you to rum back."
"I only hesitate because I dont know what well find inside. If its empty--" And then he added in a rather louder voice, "Then its empty," and he strode forward and pushed against the entry panel.
The door retracted with silent speed and Seldon took a step back at the surprising flood of light from within.
And there, facing him, eyes alive with light, arms half-upraised, one foot slightly advanced before the other, gleaming with a faintly yellow metallic shine, was a human figure. For a few moments, it seemed to be wearing a tight-fitting tunic, but on closer inspection it became apparent that the tunic was part of the structure of the object.
"Its the robot," said Seldon in awe, "but its metallic."
"Worse than that," said Dors, who had stepped quickly to one side and then to the other. "Its eyes dont follow me. Its arms dont as much as tremble. Its not alive--if one can speak of robots as being alive." And a man--unmistakably a man--stepped out from behind the robot and said, "Perhaps not. But I am alive."
And almost automatically, Dors stepped forward and took her place between Seldon and the man who had suddenly appeared.
第五十七章
　　这是一间很大的房间，由于没有任何类似家具的陈设，因此显得更为宽敞。没有椅子，没有长凳，没有任何座位。也没有高台，没有帘幔，或任何的装饰。
没有灯光，只有均匀、柔和的漫射照明光线。四面墙壁并非全然空洞，上面嵌装着许多小型、原始的二维电视屏幕，而且全都开着。它们相互之间有固定的间隔，每个的高度都不尽相同，很难看出其中的规律。从铎丝与谢顿所站的位置，根本连三维的视觉都无法产生，更别提真正全息电视的影像效果。
那里已经有些人，人数不多，而且都没有聚在一块。他们零星站在各处，像那些电视显像器一样，很难看出他们之间的相关位置。每个人都身穿白色裰服，每个人都披挂着肩带。
大部分的时问，这里面安静无声。没有人以平常的方式说话，只有一些人蠕动着嘴唇，轻声地喃喃自语。走动的人都悄无声息，而且目光律朝下。
这种气氛简直与葬礼无异。
谢顿倾身凑向铎丝，她立刻将一根指头放在唇边，然后向其中一个电视显像器指了指。屏幕映出一个如诗如画、花朵盛开的花园，镜头正在缓缓移动，将全景一一呈现。
他们模仿其他人的方式，朝那个显像器走去——缓缓挪动脚步，每一步都轻轻放下。
当他们距离屏幕只有半米时，传来一阵轻柔娇媚的声音：“安特宁花园，坐落于伊奥斯近郊，根据古代旅游指南与照片复制。请注意……”
铎丝开始悄声说话，谢顿无法再听清楚电视机传出的声音。她说：“有人走近时它就开启，我们走开后会自动关闭。如果我们靠得够近，便能在它的掩护之下交谈，但不要望着我，万一有人接近立刻闭嘴。”
谢顿低着头，双手交握摆在胸前（他早已注意到，这是最常被采用的姿势），说道：“我预料随时有人会放声哭泣。”
“也许有人会这么做，他们正在哀悼他们的失落世界。”铎丝说。
“我希望他们每隔一阵子更换一次影片，总是看同样的内容可真要命。”
“它们全都不一样，”铎丝的眼睛来回扫瞄了一下，“或许会定期更换内容，我也不知道。”
“等一等！”谢顿的音量稍稍提高，接着又赶紧压低，“到这里来。”
铎丝皱起眉头，她没听清楚那几个字，不过谢顿又轻轻摆头示意。他们再度蹑手蹑脚地移动，但谢顿的脚步越迈越大，因为他感到必须加快步伐。铎丝追上来，突然拉住他的裰服——只是一瞬间的动作，他便放慢了脚步。
“这里有机器人。”在电视机的声音的掩护之下他说道。
画面是一栋住宅的一角，前景是一片起伏的草坪与一列树篱，此外还有三个只能形容为机器人的东西。它们显然都是金属制品，外形有几分接近人类。
录音的旁白说：“这是新近制作的画面，是著名的三世纪温都姆属地的建筑。您见到的接近正中的那个机仆，根据民间传说名叫本达；根据古代的记录，它在被替换前服务了二十二年。”
铎丝说：“‘新近制作的’，所以他们一定经常更换画面。”
“除非他们这句‘新近制作的’说了有一千年。”
此时，另一个麦曲生人走进这个声域。他压低声音，不过没有谢顿与铎丝的耳语那么低，说道：“你们好，兄弟们。”
当他说话的时候，并未望着谢顿与铎丝：谢顿在惊吓之余，曾对他投以不自觉的一瞥，便赶紧将头转开；铎丝则完全没理会这个人。
谢顿感到犹豫不决。菌丝七二曾说圣堂内禁止交谈，也许他言过其实．话说回来，他在童年后再也未曾进入圣堂。
在走投无路之下，谢顿认定自己必须开口。他悄声说道：“你好，兄弟。”
他根本不晓得是否有什么正确的答复用语，或者这种用语是否存在。不过，那位麦曲生人好像不觉得有什么不对劲。
“愿你重归奥罗拉怀抱。”他说。
“也愿你重归，”谢顿说完之后，由于感到对方似乎期待他再说下去，于是补充道：“奥罗拉怀抱。”直到此时，紧张状态才往无形中松弛少许，谢顿察觉他的额头正在冒汗。
那位麦曲生人说：“真漂亮！我以前从没看过这个画面。”
“做得十分精巧。”接着，谢顿壮着胆子加了一句，“这是永远无法忘怀的失落。”
对方似乎吓了一跳。然后说：“的确，的确。”说完径自离去。
铎丝斥责道：“不要冒险，别说没有必要的话。”
“这似乎很自然。无论如何，这的确是新近制作的。不过那些机仆真令人失望，他们的模样是我想象中的普通机器人。我想看的是有机体的机仆，具有人形的那种。”
“假如它们的确存在，”铎丝的几气有些迟疑，“在我的感觉中，它们不会用来从事园艺工作。”
“正是如此，”谢顿说，“我们必须找到长老阁。”
“那得真有长老阁才行。在我的感觉中，这个空洞的洞穴除了空洞之外根本一无所有。”
“我们找找看。”
他们沿着墙壁向前走，经过一个又一个屏幕，试着在每个屏幕前停留长短不等的时间。最后，铎丝突然紧紧抓住谢顿的双臂，原来在某两个屏幕之间，有些线条隐约形成一个矩形轮廓。
“一道门。”铎丝说完，又有所保留地补充道：“你认为是吗？”
谢顿暗中四下张望一番。为了维持哀伤的气氛，每个人的脸不是盯着电视显像器，就是以悲伤的心情低头专心面对地板。对他们两人而言，这是最方便不过的机会。
谢顿说：“你想它要怎么打开？”
“开启触片？”
“我看不出来。”
“只是未标出而已，不过那里有点变色，你看到没有？经过多少手掌？被按了多少次？”
“我来试试。你帮我把风，如果行人向这边望，就赶紧踢我一下。”
他稍微屏住气息，碰了一下那个变色的部位．可是没有任何反应。接着他将手掌完全按上去，并且用力一压。
嵌在墙上的门静静开启，没有吱吱作响，也没有摩擦声。谢顿尽快钻进去，铎丝紧跟在他后面。两人进来之后，那道门又重新关上。
“现在的问题是，”铎丝说，“有没有人看到我们？”
谢顿说：“长老们一定经常由这道门出入。”
“没错，可是会有人把我们当长老吗？”
谢倾等了一下，然后说：“如果我们被看到，如果有人认为出了问题，那么我们进来不到十五秒钟，这道门就会再被人撞开。”
“有这个可能，”铎丝淡淡地说，“也可能在门的这一侧，根本没什么值得看、值得偷的东西，所以没有人在意我们是否闯入。”
“这点待会儿就能见分晓。”谢顿喃喃自语道。
他们进来的这个房间稍嫌狭窄，而且有几分昏暗，不过他们再走进一点之后，室内的光线便明亮起来。
房间里有些宽大而舒适的椅子、几张小桌、数个坐卧两用的沙发、一台又深又高的冰箱，此外还有一些碗柜。
“如果这就是长老阁，”谢顿说，“长老们似乎让自己过得很舒服，虽然圣堂本身简朴肃穆。”
“这是意料中的事，”铎丝说，“统治阶级力行禁欲生活的少之又少，只有在公开场合例外。把这点记在你的笔记簿上，作为心理史学的金科玉律之一。”她四下望了望，“这里也没有机器人。”
谢顿说：“阁代表高处，别忘记了。这个屋顶并不高，上面一定还有许多楼层，那一定就是通道。”他指着铺有高级地毯的楼梯。
然而，他并未朝它走去，却迟疑地四下打量。
铎丝猜到他在找什么。“别再想升降机了，麦曲生有一种崇拜原始主义的风尚，这点你该还记得吧？不会有升降机的，非但如此，就算我们踏上楼梯底端，我也相当确定，它绝不会开始向上移动。我们必须爬上去，也许有好几层呢。”
“爬上去？”
“它一定通往长老阁，这是理所当然的事——如果它真通到某处。你究竟是要还是不要去长老阁看一看？”
于是他们一起走向楼梯间，开始向上爬。
随着楼层的增加，光线的强度稳定地、显著地递减。等到他们爬了三层之后，谢顿深深吸一口气，悄声说道：“我自认身体状况相当好，但我痛恨这种运动。”
“你不习惯这种消耗体力的特殊方式。”她点也没有筋疲力尽的感觉。
楼梯在第三层的尽头结束，他们面前又出现了另一道门。
“如果锁住了呢？”谢顿这句话不大像是对铎丝说的，倒更像自言自语：“我们要试着将它撞开吗？”
但是铎丝却说：“既然下面的门没锁，它又何必上锁呢？假使这就是长老阁，我猜想应该有个禁忌，禁止长老之外的任何人进入，而禁忌要比任何类型的锁更为牢靠。”
“只对那些接受禁忌的人有效。”谢顿虽然这么说，却未向那道门走去。
“既然你踌躇不前，现在还有时间向后转。”铎丝说，“事实上，我是想劝你回头。”
“我之所以踌躇不前，是因为不知道会在里面发现什么。如果它是空的……”
然后，他以提高几分的音量补充道：“那么它就是空的。”说完他便大步向前，按了一下开扁触板。
那道门迅疾无声地缩人墙内，里向立刻涌出一股强光．谢帧惊愕之余连忙后退一步。
而对着他的是个人彤，它的双眼炯炯有神，双臂举在半空之中，一只脚稍微向前踏出，全身闪耀着微弱的黄色金属的光芒。乍一看，它似乎穿着一件紧身短袖上衣，但再仔细审视，那件上衣显然是整体的一部分。
“它是个机器人，”谢顿以敬畏的口吻说，“但它是金属制品。”
铎丝说：“还有更糟的，”刚才她曾迅速左右挪移，“它的眼睛并没跟着我移动，它的手臂连些微颤抖的动作都没有。它不是活的——如果我们说机器人有死有活的话。”
这时，一个人——百分之百是个真人——从机器人身后走出来，说道：“它也许不是，但我可是活生生的。”
铎丝几乎立刻反射般地踏出一步，挡在谢顿与那个突然冒出的人之间。
Chapter 58

Seldon pushed Dors to one side, perhaps a shade more roughly than he intended.
"I dont need protection. This is our old friend Sunmaster Fourteen." The man who faced them, wearing a double sash that was perhaps his right as High Elder, said, "And you are Tribesman Seldon."
"Of course," said Seldon.
"And this, despite her masculine dress, is Tribeswoman Venabili."
Dors said nothing.
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "You are right, of course, tribesman. You are in no danger of physical harm from me. Please sit down. Both of you. Since you are not a Sister, tribeswoman, you need not retire. There is a seat for you which, if you value such a distinction, you will be the first woman ever to have used."
"I do not value such a distinction," said Dors, spacing her words for emphasis. Sunmaster Fourteen nodded.
"That is as you wish. I too will sit down, for I must ask you questions and I do not care to do it standing." They were sitting now in a corner of the room. Seldons eyes wandered to the metal robot.
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "It is a robot."
"I know," said Seldon briefly.
"I know you do," said Sunmaster Fourteen with similar curtness. "But now that we have settled that matter, why are you here?"
Seldon gazed steadily at Sunmaster Fourteen and said, "To see the robot."
"Do you know that no one but an Elder is allowed in the aerie?"
"I did not know that, but I suspected it."
"Do you know that no tribesperson is allowed in the Sacratorium?"
"I was told that."
"And you ignored the fact, is that it?"
"As I said, we wanted to see the robot."
"Do you know that no woman, even a Sister, is allowed in the Sacratorium except at certain stated--and rare--occasions?"
"I was told that."
"And do you know that no woman is at any time--or for any reason--allowed to dress in masculine garb? That holds, within the borders of Mycogen, for tribeswomen as well as for Sisters."
"I was not told that, but I am not surprised."
"Good. I want you to understand all this. Now, why did you want to see the robot?"
Seldon said with a shrug, "Curiosity. I had never seen a robot or even known that such a thing existed."
"And how did you come to know that it did exist and, specifically, that it existed here?"
Seldon was silent, then said, "I do not wish to answer that question."
"Is that why you were brought to Mycogen by Tribesman Hummin? To investigate robots?"
"No. Tribesman Hummin brought us here that we might be secure. However, we are scholars, Dr. Venabili and I. Knowledge is our province and to gain knowledge is our purpose. Mycogen is little understood outside its borders and we wish to know more about your ways and your methods of thought. It is a natural desire and, it seems to us, a harmless--even praiseworthy--one."
"Ah, but we do not wish the outer tribes and worlds to know about us. That is our natural desire and we are the judge of what is harmless to us and what harmful. So I ask you again, tribesman: How did you know that a robot existed in Mycogen and that it existed in this room?"
"General rumor," said Seldon at length.
"Do you insist on that?"
"General rumor. I insist on it."
Sunmaster Fourteens keen blue eyes seemed to sharpen and he said without raising his voice, "Tribesman Seldon, we have long cooperated with Tribesman Hummin. For a tribesman, he has seemed a decent and trustworthy individual. For a tribesman! When he brought you two to us and commended you to our protection, we granted it. But Tribesman Hummin, whatever his virtues, is still a tribesman and we had misgivings. We were not at all sure what your--or his--real purpose might be."
"Our purpose was knowledge," said Seldon. "Academic knowledge. Tribeswoman Venabili is a historian and I too have an interest in history. Why should we not be interested in Mycogenian history?"
"For one thing, because we do not wish you to be.--In any case, two of our trusted Sisters were sent to you. They were to cooperate with you, try to find out what it was you wanted, and--what is the expression you tribesmen use?--play along with you. Yet not in such a way that you would be too aware as to what was happening."
Sunmaster Fourteen smiled, but it was a grim smile. "Raindrop Forty-Five," Sunmaster Fourteen went on, "went shopping with Tribeswoman Venabili, but there seemed nothing out of the way in what happened on those trips. Naturally, we had a full report. Raindrop Forty-Three showed you, Tribesman Seldon, our microfarms. You might have been suspicious of her willingness to accompany you alone, something that is utterly out of the question for us, but you reasoned that what applied to Brothers did not apply to tribesmen and you flattered yourself that that flimsy bit of reasoning won her over. She complied with your desire, though at considerable cost to her peace of mind. And, eventually, you asked for the Book. To have handed it over too easily might have roused your suspicion, so she pretended to a perverse desire only you could satisfy. Her self-sacrifice will not be forgotten.--I take it, tribesman, you still have the Book and I suspect you have it with you now. May I have it?"
Seldon sat in bitter silence.
Sunmaster Fourteens wrinkled hand remained obtrusively outstretched and he said, "How much better it would be than to wrest it from you by force."
And Seldon handed it over.
Sunmaster Fourteen leafed through its pages briefly, as though to reassure himself it was unharmed. He said with a small sigh, "It will have to be carefully destroyed in the approved manner. Sad.--But once you had this Book, we were, of course, not surprised when you made your way out to the Sacratorium. You were watched at all times, for you cannot think that any Brother or Sister, not totally absorbed, would not recognize you for tribespeople at a glance. We know a skincap when we see one and there are less than seventy of them in Mycogen ... almost all belonging to tribesmen on official business who remain entirely in secular governmental buildings during the time they are here. So you were not only seen but unmistakably identified, over and over.
"The elderly Brother who met you was careful to tell you about the library as well as about the Sacratorium, but he was also careful to tell you what you were forbidden to do, for we did not wish to entrap you. Skystrip Two also warned you ... and quite forcibly. Nevertheless, you did not turn away.
"The shop at which you bought the white kirtle and the two sashes informed us at once and from that we knew well what you intended. The library was kept empty, the librarian was warned to keep his eyes to himself, the Sacratorium was kept under-utilized. The one Brother who inadvertently spoke to you almost gave it away, but hastened off when he realized with whom he was dealing. And then you came up here.
"You see, then, that it was your intention to come up here and that we in no way lured you here. You came as a result of your own action, your own desire, and what I want to ask you--yet once again--is: Why?"
It was Dors who answered this time, her voice firm, her eyes hard. "We will tell you yet once again, Mycogenian. We are scholars, who consider knowledge sacred and it is only knowledge that we seek. You did not lure us here, but you did not stop us either, as you might have done before ever we approached this building. You smoothed our way and made it easy for us and even that might be considered a lure. And what harm have we done? We have in no way disturbed the building, or this room, or you, or that."
She pointed to the robot. "It is a dead lump of metal that you hide here and we now know that it is dead and that is all the knowledge we sought. We thought it would be more significant and we are disappointed, but now that we know it is merely what it is, we will leave--and, if you wish, we will leave Mycogen as well."
Sunmaster Fourteen listened with no trace of expression on his face, but when she was done, he addressed Seldon, saying, "This robot, as you see it, is a symbol, a symbol of all we have lost and of all we no longer have, of all that, through thousands of years, we have not forgotten and what we intend someday to return to. Because it is all that remains to us that is both material and authentic, it is dear to us--yet to your woman it is only a dead lump of metal. Do you associate yourself with that judgment, Tribesman Seldon?"
Seldon said, "We are members of societies that do not tie ourselves to a past that is thousands of years old, making no contact at all with what has existed between that past and ourselves. We live in the present, which we recognize as the product of all the past and not of one long-gone moment of time that we hug to our chests. We realize, intellectually, what the robot may mean to you and we are willing to let it continue to mean that to you. But we can only see it with our own eyes, as you can only see it with yours. To us, it is a dead lump of metal."
"And now," said Dors, "we will leave."
"You will not," said Sunmaster Fourteen. "By coming here, you have committed a crime. It is a crime only in our eyes, as you will hasten to point out"--his lips curved in a wintry smile--"but this is our territory and, within it, we make the definitions. And this crime, as we define it, is punishable by death."
"And you are going to shoot us down?" said Dors haughtily.
Sunmaster Fourteens expression was one of contempt and he continued to speak only to Seldon. "What do you think we are, Tribesman Seldon? Our culture is as old as yours, as complex, as civilized, as humane. I am not armed. You will be tried and, since you are manifestly guilty, executed according to law, quickly and painlessly.
"If you were to try to leave now, I would not stop you, but there are many Brothers below, many more than there appeared to be when you entered the Sacratorium and, in their rage at your action, they may lay rough and forceful hands on you. It has happened in our history that tribespeople have even died so and it is not a pleasant death--certainly not a painless one."
"We were warned of this," said Dors, "by Skystrip Two. So much for your complex, civilized, and humane culture."
"People can be moved to violence at moments of emotion, Tribesman Seldon," said Sunmaster Fourteen calmly, "whatever their humanity in moments of calm. This is true in every culture, as your woman, who is said to be a historian, must surely know."
Seldon said, "Let us remain reasonable, Sunmaster Fourteen. You may be the law in Mycogen over local affairs, but you are not the law over us and you know it. We are both non-Mycogenian citizens of the Empire and it is the Emperor and his designated legal officers who must remain in charge of any capital offense."
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "That may be so in statutes and on papers and on holovision screens, but we are not talking theory now. The High Elder has long had the power to punish crimes of sacrilege without interference from the Imperial throne."
"If the criminals are your own people," said Seldon. "It would be quite different if they were outsiders."
"I doubt it in this case. Tribesman Hummin brought you here as fugitives and we are not so yeast-headed in Mycogen that we dont strongly suspect that you are fugitives from the Emperors laws. Why should he object if we do his work for him?"
"Because," said Seldon, "he would. Even if we were fugitives from the Imperial authorities and even if he wanted us only to punish us, he would still want us. To allow you to kill, by whatever means and for whatever reason, non-Mycogenians without due Imperial process would be to defy his authority and no Emperor could allow such a precedent. No matter how eager he might be to see that the microfood trade not be interrupted, he would still feel it necessary to re-establish the Imperial prerogative. Do you wish, in your eagerness to kill us, to have a division of Imperial soldiery loot your farms and your dwellings, desecrate your Sacratorium, and take liberties with the Sisters: Consider."
Sunmaster Fourteen smiled once again, but displayed no softness. "Actually, I have considered and there is an alternative. After we condemn you, we could delay your execution to allow you to appeal to the Emperor for a review of your case. The Emperor might be grateful at this evidence of our ready submission to his authority and grateful too to lay his hands on you two--for some reason of his own--and Mycogen might profit. Is that what you want, then? To appeal to the Emperor in due course and to be delivered to him?"
Seldon and Dors looked at each other briefly and were silent.
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "I feel you would rather be delivered to the Emperor than die, but why do I get the impression that the preference is only by a slight margin?"
"Actually," said a new voice, "I think neither alternative is acceptable and that we must search for a third."
第五十八章
　　谢顿将铎丝推到一旁，他的动作或许比本意粗鲁了些。“我不需要保护，这是我们的老朋友日主十四。”
面对他们的人披挂着一双肩带，那也许是他身为元老的一种权利。他说：“而你是外族男子谢顿。”
“当然。”谢顿说。
“而这位，尽管她穿着男性服装，是外族女子凡纳比里。”
铎丝什么也没说。
日主十四说：“你当然说得对，外族男子。你们没有危险，我不会伤害你们。请坐，你们两位。既然你不是一位姐妹，外族女子，你就没有必要退下。你可以坐在这里，如果你珍视这样的殊荣，你将是第一个坐上这个座位的女人。”
“我不珍视这样的殊荣。”铎丝一字一顿地强调。
日主十四点了点头：“随你的便。我也要坐下来，因为我必须问你们一些问题，我不喜欢站着做这件事。”
他们坐在这个房间的一个角落，谢顿的眼睛游移到那个金属机器人身上。
日主十四说：“那是个机仆。”
“我知道。”谢顿简短地答道。
“我知道这点。”日主十四的话也同样简略，“不过既然我们已经达成这个共识，现在我要问，你们来这里做什么？”
谢顿目不转睛地凝视着日主十四：“来看这个机仆。”
“你可知道除了长老，任何人都不准进入长老阁？”
“我不知道这件事，但我料想到了。”
“你可知道外族人一律不准进入圣堂？”
“我听说了。”
“而你却漠视这些，是吗？”
“正如我所说，我们想要看那个机仆。”
“你可知道除了在某些特定的，而且罕有的节日之外，任何一个女人，甚至包括姐妹在内，都不可以进入圣堂？”
“我听说了。”
“你可知道不论任何时候，女人都不准以任何理由穿着男性服装？在麦曲生边界之内，它非但适用于姐妹，也同样适用于外族女子。”
“这点我没听说过，但我并不惊讶。”
“很好，我要你了解这一切前提。现在告诉我，你为何想要看这个机仆？”
谢顿耸了耸肩，说道：“出于好奇。我从没见过机仆，甚至不知道有这种东西存在。”
“那你怎么会知道它的确存在，非但如此，还知道它在这里？”
谢顿沉默了一会儿，然后说：“我不愿意回答这个问题。”
“这就是外族男子夫铭把你们带到麦曲生的原因？前来调查机仆？”
“不，外族男子夫铭带我们到这里来，只是希望确保我们的安全。然而，我们是学者，凡纳比里博士和我都是。知识是我们的疆场，求取知识是我们的目标。麦曲生的一切鲜为外界了解，我们希望多知道些你们的风土民情和思考方式。这是一个自然的渴望，而且在我们看来，它不仅无害，还值得赞赏。”
“哼，我们却不希望外旅和其他世界了解我们，那是我们自然的渴望。至于什么对我们无害，什么对我们有害，要由我们自己判断。所以我再问你一遍，外族男子，你怎么知道麦曲生境内有个机仆，而且藏在这个房间里？”
“道听途说。”谢顿终于回答。
“你坚持这个答案吗？”
“道听途说，我坚持这个答案。”
日主十四锐利的蓝眼睛似乎变得更为尖锐，但他并未提高音量。“外族男子谢顿，我们和外族男子夫铭有长久的合作关系。就外族人而言，他似乎是高尚而值得信赖的一位——仅就一个外族人而言！当他带你们两位前来，嘱托我们保护你们的时候，我们答应了这件事。但不论外族男子夫铭有多少美德，他仍旧是个外族人，我们还是放心不下。当初，我们完全无法确定你们的——或是他的——真正目的是什么。”
“我们的目的是知识，”谢顿说，“学术性的知识。外族女子凡纳比里是历史学家，我自己也喜欢历史。我们为何不该对麦曲生的历史有兴趣？”
“原因之一，是因为我们不希望你们如此。总之，我们派了两个信得过的姐妹到你们身边。她们奉命跟你们合作，试图查出你们究竟想要什么，还有——你们外族人是怎么说的？跟你们假戏真做。然而，却不让你们察觉她们真正的意图。”日主十四露出微笑，但那是一个狞笑。
“雨点四五，”日主十四继续说，“陪同外族女子凡纳比里逛街购物。但在几次行程中，似乎都没有什么不寻常的事发生——当然，我们接获了完整的报告。雨点四三则带领你，外族男子谢顿，去参观我们的微生农场。本来，你可能怀疑她为何愿意单独陪你前往，这对我们而言是绝不可能的事。但你却自作聪明地推论，认为适用于兄弟的规矩并不适用于外族男子；你自以为是地相信，这么薄弱的理由就能解除她的心理防线。她顺应了你的心愿，虽然这对她内心的宁静造成莫大伤害。最后，你开口要那本典籍。如果过于轻易交给你，有可能引起你的疑心，所以她假装有一种违常的欲望，只有你才能满足。我们绝不会忘记她的自我牺牲。我认为，外族男子，你仍拥有那本典籍，而且我猜你正带在身上。我能要回来吗？”
谢顿痛苦、沉默地呆坐着。
日主十四布满皱纹的手坚定地伸出来。他说：“这比从你手中强行夺走好多了吧？”
于是谢顿将书递给他。日主十四随便翻了翻，仿佛要确定它并未受损。
他轻轻叹了一声．又说：“必须以认可的方式将它谨慎地销毁，可悲啊！不过，既然让你拿到这本典籍，你们会启程前往圣堂，我们一点也不惊讶。你们随时随地都受到监视。你不会认为有任何兄弟或姐妹，只要不是心无旁骜，会无法一眼就认出你们是外族人吧。我们看到人皮帽时，立刻就能分辨出来，而在整个麦曲生，发出去的人皮帽还不到七十顶——几乎全部属于前来谈公事的外族男子，他们在此地停留期间，自始至终都留在世俗的政府建筑内。所以你们不只被人看见，而且总是被正确无误地指认，一次又一次。
“那位和你们不期而遇的年长弟兄，没有忘记告诉你们有关图书馆和圣堂的一切，但他也不忘告诉你们什么事是不能做的，因为我们不希望诱你们落入陷阱。天纹二也警告过你们——以强而有力的方式。然而，你们并未因此打消念头。
“你们购买白色裰服和两条肩带的那家商店，在第一时间就向我们通报，而根据这个情报，我们对你们的企图了如指掌。图书馆故意被撤空，馆员事先接到警告，要他对你们不闻不问，圣堂则保持低度使用的状态。那位一时不察而和你攀谈的兄弟，险些让我们的计谋曝光，但在了解到面对的是什么人之后，他便立刻匆匆离去。然后，你们就来到这里。
“所以你看，来到这里是你们的本意，我们根本没有引诱你们。是你们自己的行动、自己的渴望把你们带来的。而我要再问你们一遍的是：为什么？”
这回轮到铎丝回答，她的语气坚定、目光严厉。“那我们就再一次告诉你，麦曲生人。我们是学者，我们认为知识是神圣的，而我们寻找的也只是知识。你未曾引诱我们来到此地，可是你也没有阻止我们——早在我们接近这座建筑之前，你就能这么做了。反之，你替我们开路，让我们通行无阻，即使这样也可视为一种引诱。而我们造成了什么损害吗？我们完全没有侵扰这座建筑物，或足这间房间，或是你这个人，或是那玩意。”
她指着那个机器人：“你藏在这里的是一堆破铜烂铁，现在我们知道它是死的，我们寻求的知识也仅止于此。我们本来以为它十分重要，但我们失望了。现在我们知道它不过如此，我们马上就走。你若希望的话，我们还会码上离开麦曲生。”
日主十四聆听这番话的时候，脸上没有丝毫表情，但是当她说完后，他却对谢顿说：“你所见到的这个机仆是个象征，象征着我们失落的一切、我们不再拥有的一切，也象征着数千年来我们未曾遗忘、总有一天将要收复的一切。如今我们身边只有它是一件既具体又可信的遗物，因此在我们眼中珍贵异常。可是对你的女人而言，它却只是‘一堆破铜烂铁’。你认同这个评价吗，外族男子谢顿？”
谢顿说：“我们两人所属的社会，并未将自己和数千年前的过去捆在一起，也不会去理会存在过去和我们之间的一切。我们生活在现在，我们将它视为所有过去的总和，而并非仅源自我们所拥有的某个年代久远的时刻。我们了解——理智上了解——这个机仆对你们可能具有的意义，我们愿意让它继续对你们有这样的意义。但我们只能用自己的眼光看它，正如你只能用你的眼光看它一样。对我们而言，它就是一堆破铜烂铁。”
“现在，”铎丝说，“我们要走了。”
“你们不能走。”日主十四说，“你们来到这里，就已经犯了罪。它是只存在于我们眼中的罪行——我知道你会赶紧指出这一点。”他的嘴角弯出一个冷冰冰的笑容．“然而这里是我们的领土，在这个范围内，一切由我们下定义。而在我们的定义中，这是一项应当处死的重罪。”
“你准备将我们射杀吗？”铎丝以倨傲的口气说。
日主十四露出轻蔑的表情，继续只对谢顿一个人说话：“你以为我们是什么人，外旅男子谢顿？我们的文化和你们的同样古老，也同样繁复、同样文明、同样人道。我没有携带武器。你们将接受审判，由于你们罪证确凿，注定将被依法处决，既利落又没痛苦。假如现在你们试图离开这里，我不会阻止你们，但是下面等着很多兄弟，比你们进平堂时见到的多得多。你们的行为令他们咬牙切齿，他们也许会对你们动粗，下手绝不留情。在我们的历史上，甚至有外族人死在这种情况之下。那并非一种愉快的死法，而且绝不是毫无痛苦。”
“我们听过这种警告，”铎丝说，“天纹二说的。好一个繁复、文明又人道的文化！”
“不论民众在冷静的时候具有何种人道情怀，外族男子谢顿，”日主十四冷静地说，“在情绪激动的时候，他们全能被煽动成暴力分子。这在各个文化中都一样，你的女人据说是个历史学家，她一定知道这点。”
谢顿说：“让我们保持理智，日主十四。在地方性事务上，你也许可以代表麦曲生的法律，但你并非我们的法律，这点你也知道。我们两人都不是麦曲生人，而是银河帝国的公民，任何应判死刑的重罪，都该交由皇上或是他任命的司法官员处理。”
日主十四说：“在法令上、文件上，或全息电视屏幕上或许如此，但我们现在不是在谈理论。长久以来，元老一向都有惩处亵渎罪的权力，从未受到来自皇权的干涉。”
“罪犯若是你们自己的同胞，自然如此。”谢顿说，“但如果是外人，情况就相当不同。”
“就本案而言，我对这点深表怀疑。外旅男子夫铭把你们当逃犯一样带到这里，麦曲生人脑袋里装的可不是发粉，我们怀疑你们是在逃避皇上的法律。如果我们帮他代劳，他为什么要反对呢？”
“因为——”谢顿说，“他一定会。即使我们是帝国当局通缉的逃犯；即使他要抓我们回去，只是为了惩罚我们，他仍会想要将我们生擒。无论用什么方式，为了什么理由，如果未经适当的帝国法律程序，就让你杀掉一个非麦曲生人，那等于向他的权威挑战，没有任何皇帝能开这种先例。不论他多么希望微生食品的贸易不受干扰，他仍会感到有必要重建皇帝的权威。难道你希望，由于你逞一时之快将我们杀掉，而招来一师帝国军队掠夺你们的农场和住所，亵渎你们的圣堂，并且非礼你们的姐妹？请你三思。”
日主十四再度露出笑容，可是显得并未软化：“事实上，我已三思过了，的确另有一个选择。在我们将你们两人定罪后，我们可以延缓死刑的执行，允许你们向皇上提出上诉，要求重审你们的案子。如此证明我们臣服于他的权威之下，还把你们交到他的手中，皇上也许因此圣心大悦，而麦曲生便可能受惠。所以说，这就是你想要的吗？找机会向皇上提出上诉，然后被解送到他那里去？”
谢顿与铎丝很快互望了一眼，两人都没吭声。
“你们似乎宁愿被解送给皇上，也不愿死在这里。”日主十四说，“可是为什么我有一种感觉，你们觉得这两种选择都没什么差别？”
“其实，”一个新的声音说，“我认为这两种选择都无法令人接受，我们必须找出第三条路。”
Chapter 59

It was Dors who identified the newcomer first, perhaps because it was she who expected him.
"Hummin," she said, "thank goodness you found us. I got in touch with you the moment I realized I was not going to deflect Hari from"--she held up her hands in a wide gesture "this."
Hummins smile was a small one that did not alter the natural gravity of his face. There was a subtle weariness about him.
"My dear," he said, "I was engaged in other things. I cannot always pull away at a moments notice. And when I got here, I had, like you two, to supply myself with a kirtle and sash, to say nothing of a skincap, and make my way out here. Had I been here earlier, I might have stopped this, but I believe Im not too late."
Sunmaster Fourteen had recovered from what had seemed to be a painful shock. He said in a voice that lacked its customary severe depth, "How did you get in here, Tribesman Hummin?"
"It was not easy, High Elder, but as Tribeswoman Venabili likes to say, I am a very persuasive person. Some of the citizens here remember who I was and what I have done for Mycogen in the past, that I am even an honorary Brother. Have you forgotten, Sunmaster Fourteen?"
The Elder replied, "I have not forgotten, but even the most favorable memory can not survive certain actions. A tribesman here and a tribeswoman. There is no greater crime. All you have done is not great enough to balance that. My people are not unmindful. We will make it up to you some other way. But these two must die or be handed over to the Emperor."
"I am also here," said Hummin calmly. "Is that not a crime as well?"
"For you," said Sunmaster Fourteen, "for you personally, as a kind of honorary Brother, I can ... overlook it ... once. Not these two."
"Because you expect a reward from the Emperor? Some favor? Some concession? Have you already been in touch with him or with his Chief of Staff, Eto Demerzel, more likely?"
"That is not a subject for discussion."
"Which is itself an admission. Come on, I dont ask what the Emperor promised, but it cannot be much. He does not have much to give in these degenerate days. Let me make you an offer. Have these two told you they are scholars?"
"They have."
"And they are. They are not lying. The tribeswoman is a historian and the tribesman is a mathematician. The two together are trying to combine their talents to make a mathematics of history and they call the combined subject psychohistory. "
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "I know nothing about this psychohistory, nor do I care to know. Neither it nor any other facet of your tribal learning interests me."
"Nevertheless," said Hummin, "I suggest that you listen to me."
It took Hummin some fifteen minutes, speaking concisely, to describe the possibility of organizing the natural laws of society (something he always mentioned with audible quotation marks in the tone of his voice) in such a way as to make it possible to anticipate the future with a substantial degree of probability.
And when he was done, Sunmaster Fourteen, who had listened expressionlessly, said, "A highly unlikely piece of speculation, I should say."
Seldon, with a rueful expression, seemed about to speak, undoubtedly to agree, but Hummins hand, resting lightly on the others knee, tightened unmistakably.
Hummin said, "Possibly, High Elder, but the Emperor doesnt think so. And by the Emperor, who is himself an amiable enough personage, I really mean Demerzel, concerning whose ambitions you need no instruction. They would like very much to have these two scholars, which is why Ive brought them here for safekeeping. I had little expectation that you would do Demerzels work for him by delivering the scholars to him."
"They have committed a crime that--"
"Yes, we know, High Elder, but it is only a crime because you choose to call it so. No real harm has been done."
"It has been done to our belief, to our deepest felt--"
"But imagine what harm will be done if psychohistory falls into the hands of Demerzel. Yes, I grant that nothing may come of it, but suppose for a moment that something does and that the Imperial government has the use of it--can foretell what is to come--can take measures with that foreknowledge which no one else would have--can take measures, in fact, designed to bring about an alternate future more to the Imperial liking."
"Well?"
"Is there any doubt, High Elder, that the alternate future more to the Imperial liking would be one of tightened centralization? For centuries now, as you very well know, the Empire has been undergoing a steady decentralization. Many worlds now acknowledge only lip service to the Emperor and virtually rule themselves. Even here on Trantor, there is decentralization. Mycogen, as only one example, is free of Imperial interference for the most part. You rule its High Elder and there is no Imperial officer at your side overseeing your actions and decisions. How long do you think that will last with men like Demerzel adjusting the future to their liking?"
"Still the flimsiest of speculation," said Sunmaster Fourteen, "but a disturbing one, I admit."
"On the other hand, if these scholars can complete their task, an unlikely if, you might say, but an if--then they are sure to remember that you spared them when you might have chosen not to. And it would then be conceivable that they would learn to arrange a future, for instance, that would allow Mycogen to be given a world of its own, a world that could be terraformed into a close replica of the Lost World. And even if these two forget your kindness, I will be here to remind them."
"Well--" said Sunmaster Fourteen.
"Come on," said Hummin, "it is not hard to decide what must be going through your mind. Of all tribespeople, you must trust Demerzel the least. And though the chance of psychohistory might be small (if I was not being honest with you, I would not admit that) it is not zero; and if it will bring about a restoration of the Lost World, what can you want more than that? What would you not risk for even a tiny chance of that? Come now--I promise you and my promises are not lightly given. Release these two and choose a tiny chance of your hearts desire over no chance at all."
There was silence and then Sunmaster Fourteen sighed. "I dont know how it is, Tribesman Hummin, but on every occasion that we meet, you persuade me into something I do not really want to do."
"Have I ever misled you, High Elder?"
"You have never offered me so small a chance?"
"And so high a possible reward. The one balances the other."
And Sunmaster Fourteen nodded his head. "You are right. Take these two and take them out of Mycogen and never let me see them again unless there comes a time when--But surely it will not be in my lifetime."
"Perhaps not, High Elder. But your people have been waiting patiently for nearly twenty thousand years. Would you then object to waiting another--perhaps--two hundred?"
"I would not willingly wait one moment, but my people will wait as long as they must."
And standing up, he said, "I will clear the path. Take them and go."
第五十九章
　　铎丝第一个认出来者的身份——或许因为她一直在期盼他的出现。
“夫铭，”她说，“谢天谢地，你总算找到我们了。我跟你联络的时候，正了解到我无法让哈里避免这——”她举起双手，夸张地向左右一摊：“——一切。”
夫铭露出浅浅的微笑，但这无法改变他天生的严肃神情。此外，他似乎带着一股不甚明显的倦意。
“亲爱的，”他说，“我在忙别的事，我无法总是随传随到。当我来到此地之后，我得像你们两人一样，先穿戴上裰服和肩带，人皮帽就更不用说了，然后还要赶来这里。要是我来早一些，也许能阻止这一切，但我相信我来得不算迟。”
日主十四似乎陷入一阵痛苦的惊愕中，好一会儿才回过神来，他用不再那么严肃深沉的语调说：“你是怎么进来这里的，外族男子夫铭？”
“这可不容易，元老，但正如外族女子凡纳比里喜欢说的，我是个非常具有说服力的人。这里某些居民还记得我是谁、我在过去为麦曲生做过什么，此外——我还是一名荣誉兄弟，你忘记了吗，日主十四？”
元老答道：“我没忘记，但即使是最美好的记忆，也经不起某些行动的冲击。一个外族男子竟然来到这里，还带了一个外族女子，没有比这更严重的罪行了，你为我们做的一切也不够抵消。我的人民不是忘恩负义之辈，我们会用别的方式补偿你。可是这两人必须受死，或是将他们解送给皇上。”
“我也来了。”夫铭以平静的口吻说，“这不也是一项罪行吗？”
“对你而言，”日主十四说，“对你个人而言，你是荣誉兄弟，我可以……宽容……一次，但这两个不行。”
“因为你期望皇上的奖赏？某种好处？某种让步？你已经和他接触了吗？或者更有可能的是，和他的行政首长伊图•丹莫茨尔联络上了？”
“这不是我们应该讨论的题目。”
“你这句话就等于是默认了。好啦，我不问皇上答应给你什么好处，但它绝不可能太多，在这个衰微的岁月里，他没有太多能给你的。让我向你提个条件，这两位有没有告诉你他们是学者？”
“说过。”
“的确如此，他们不是在说谎。这位外族女子是历史学家，这位外族男子是数学家。他们试图联合两人的才智，创造一个处理历史的数学，他们将这个合作题目称为‘心理史学’。”
日主十四说：“我对这个心理史学一无所知，也不想知道。不论是它或你们外族人的其他任何学问，我都一概没有兴趣。”
“纵使如此，”夫铭说，“我还是建议你听我说一说。”
夫铭大约花了十五分钟的时间，以精简的语言描述心理史学的可能性——将社会的自然定律组织起来（每当提到那些定律时，他总会改变语调，让人一听就知道有引号存在），并在大量借助几率之下，使预测未来变得可能。
他说完之后，一直面无表情聆听的日主十四说：“我觉得这是一种极其不可能的臆想。”
满面愁容的榭顿似乎有话要说，无疑是要表示观点。但夫铭原先轻放在谢顿膝上的一只手，此时却突然收紧，用意非常明显。
夫铭说：“有这个可能，元老，但皇上不这么想。话说回来，皇上本人是个相当敦厚的人物，我指的其实是丹莫茨尔，他的野心不必由我来告诉你。他们很想得到这两位学者，这就是我带他们来此避难的原因。我绝不相信你会为丹莫茨尔工作，将两位学者送到他的手上。”
“他们犯了一项重罪……”
“没错，我们知道，元老。可是这项罪名之所以成立。只是因为你选择要如此判定。它根本没有任何实质的伤害。”
“它对我们的信仰造成伤害，对我们内心最深的感情……”
“可是请你想想看，假如心理史学落入丹莫茨尔之手，那将造成什么样的伤害？没错，我承认也许什么事都不会发生，但是姑且假设有了结果，而帝国政府善加利用——能够预测未来会发生什么事；能够掌握独一无二的先见之明，并在它的指导之下采取对策。事实上，他们所采取的对策，必将是营造帝制所欲发展的另一种未来。”
“怎么样的未来？”
“帝制所欲发展的未来将是极度中央集权，元老，难道你对这点还有疑问吗？你很清楚，过去数世纪以来，帝国一直稳定地朝地方分权发展。如今，许多世界只在口头上承认皇帝，而实际上是在实行自治。甚至在川陀这里，也有地方分权的事实。麦曲生大部分的事务都不受皇权干涉，只是其中一个例子。你以元老的身份统治，没有帝国官员在旁监督你的行动和决策。假如让像丹莫茨尔那种人依照他们的喜好调整未来，你认为这种局面还能维持多久？”
“仍然是毫无根据的臆测，”日主十四说，“不过我必须承认，这听来的确令人不安。”
“另一方面，假设这两位学者能完成他们的工作——你也许会觉得可能性并不高，但这只是假设——那么他们一定会记得，你在没必要那样做的时候，曾经对他们网开一面。然后我们不难想见，他们会研究出如何安排一个未来，比如说，能让麦曲生得到一个自己的世界，一个能改造成和失落世界极为相似的世界。即使这两位忘了你的仁慈，我也会从旁提醒他们。”
“这……”日主十四支吾着。
“好啦，”夫铭说，“你心里究竟在怎么想，实在不难判定。在所有的外族人当中，你最不相信的一定是丹莫茨尔。虽然心理史学成功的机会不大（要不是我对你诚实，我也不会承认这一点），但并不等于零；如果它能帮你们重建失落世界，你又夫复何求？难道你不愿为这件事冒一丝风险？好啦！我向你承诺——你知道我从不轻易承诺任何事。把这两位放了，为你内心的愿望留点机会，总比全然无望要好。”
在一阵沉默后，日主十四叹了一声：“我不知道怎么回事，外族男子夫铭，可是我们每次见面，你总是说服我做些并非我真正想做的事。”
“我曾经误导过你吗．元老？”
“你提出的条件，机会从来没这么小。”
“而可能的报偿却那么高，两者互相扯平了。”
日主十四点了点头：“你说得没错。把这两个人带走，带他们离开麦曲生，永远不要让我再见到他们。除非有一天……但那绝不是在我有生之年。”
“或许如此，元老，可是你的族人已耐心等待了近两万年。难道你们拒绝再等上个……也许两百年？”
“我一刻也不愿再等，但不论需要多少时间，我的族人都会等下去。”
他一面起身，一面说道：“我会叫人通通让开，带他们走吧！”
Chapter 60

They were finally back in a tunnel. Hummin and Seldon had traveled through one when they went from the Imperial Sector to Streeling University in the air-taxi. Now they were in another tunnel, going from Mycogen to ... Seldon did not know where. He hesitated to ask. Hummins face seemed as if it was carved out of granite and it didnt welcome conversation.
Hummin sat in the front of the four-seater, with no one to his right. Seldon and Dors shared the backseat.
Seldon chanced a smile at Dors, who looked glum. "Its nice to be in real clothes again, isnt it?"
"I will never," said Dors with enormous sincerity, "wear or look at anything that resembles a kirtle. And I will never, under any circumstances, wear a skincap. In fact, Im going to feel odd if I ever see a normally bald man." And it was Dors who finally asked the question that Seldon had been reluctant to advance. "Chetter," she said rather petulantly, "why wont you tell us where were going?"
Hummin hitched himself into a sideways position and he looked back at Dors and Seldon gravely. "Somewhere," he said, "where it may be difficult for you to get into trouble--although Im not sure such a place exists."
Dors was at once crestfallen. "Actually, Chetter, its my fault. At Streeling, I let Hari go Upperside without accompanying him. In Mycogen, I at least accompanied him, but I suppose I ought not to have let him enter the Sacratorium at all."
"I was determined," said Seldon warmly. "It was in no way Dorss fault."
Hummin made no effort to apportion blame. He simply said, "I gather you wanted to see the robot. Was there a reason for that? Can you tell me?"
Seldon could feel himself redden. "I was wrong in that respect, Hummin. I did not see what I expected to see or what I hoped to see. If I had known the content of the aerie, I would never have bothered going there. Call it a complete fiasco."
"But then, Seldon, what was it you hoped to see? Please tell me. Take your time if you wish. This is a long trip and I am willing to listen."
"The thing is, Hummin, that I had the idea that there were humaniform robots, that they were long-lived, that at least one might still be alive, and that it might be in the aerie. There was a robot there, but it was metallic, it was dead, and it was merely a symbol. Had I but known--"
"Yes. Did we all but know, there would be no need for questions or for research of any kind. Where did you get your information about humaniform robots? Since no Mycogenian would have discussed that with you, I can think of only one source. The Mycogenian Book--a powered print-book in ancient Auroran and modern Galactic. Am I right?"
"Yes."
"And how did you get a copy?"
Seldon paused, then muttered, "Its somewhat embarrassing."
"I am not easily embarrassed, Seldon."
Seldon told him and Hummin allowed a very small smile to twitch across his face.
Hummin said, "Didnt it occur to you that what occurred had to be a charade? No Sister would do a thing like that--except under instruction and with a great deal of persuading."
Seldon frowned and said with asperity, "That was not at all obvious. People are perverted now and then. And its easy for you to grin. I didnt have the information you had and neither did Dors. If you did not wish me to fall into traps, you might have warned me of those that existed."
"I agree. I withdraw my remark. In any case, you dont have the Book any longer, Im sure."
"No. Sunmaster Fourteen took it from me."
"How much of it did you read?"
"Only a small fraction. I didnt have time. Its a huge book and I must tell you, Hummin, it is dreadfully dull."
"Yes, I know that, for I think I have read more of it than you have. It is not only dull, it is totally unreliable. It is a one-sided, official Mycogenian view of history that is more intent on presenting that view than a reasoned objectivity. It is even deliberately unclear in spots so that outsiders--even if they were to read the Book--would never know entirely what they read. What was it, for instance, that you thought you read about robots that interested you?"
"Ive already told you. They speak of humaniform robots, robots that could not be distinguished from human beings in outward appearance."
"How many of these would exist?" asked Hummin. "They dont say.--At least, I didnt come across a passage in which they gave numbers. There may have been only a handful, but one of them, the Book refers to as Renegade. It seems to have an unpleasant significance, but I couldnt make out what."
"You didnt tell me anything about that," interposed Dors. "If you had, I would have told you that its not a proper name. Its another archaic word and it means, roughly, what traitor would mean in Galactic. The older word has a greater aura of fear about it. A traitor, somehow, sneaks to his treason, but a renegade flaunts it."
Hummin said, "Ill leave the fine points of archaic language to you, Dors, but, in any case, if the Renegade actually existed and if it was a humaniform robot, then, clearly, as a traitor and enemy, it would not be preserved and venerated in the Elders aerie."
Seldon said, "I didnt know the meaning of Renegade, but, as I said, I did get the impression that it was an enemy. I thought it might have been defeated and preserved as a reminder of the Mycogenian triumph."
"Was there any indication in the Book that the Renegade was defeated?"
"No, but I might have missed that portion--"
"Not likely. Any Mycogenian victory would be announced in the Book unmistakably and referred to over and over again."
"There was another point the Book made about the Renegade," said Seldon, hesitating, "but I cant be at all sure I understood it." Hummin said, "As I told you ... They are deliberately obscure at times."
"Nevertheless, they seemed to say that the Renegade could somehow tap human emotions ... influence them--"
"Any politician can," said Hummin with a shrug. "Its called charisma--when it works."
Seldon sighed. "Well, I wanted to believe. That was it. I would have given a great deal to find an ancient humaniform robot that was still alive and that I could question."
"For what purpose?" asked Hummin.
"To learn the details of the primordial Galactic society when it still consisted of only a handful of worlds. From so small a Galaxy psychohistory could be deduced more easily."
Hummin said, "Are you sure you could trust what you heard? After many thousands of years, would you be willing to rely on the robots early memories? How much distortion would have entered into them?"
"Thats right," said Dors suddenly. "It would be like the computerized records I told you of, Hari. Slowly, those robot memories would be discarded, lost, erased, distorted. You can only go back so far and the farther you go back, the less reliable the information becomes--no matter what you do."
Hummin nodded. "Ive heard it referred to as a kind of uncertainty principle in information."
"But wouldnt it be possible," said Seldon thoughtfully, "that some information, for special reasons, would be preserved? Parts of the Mycogenian Book may well refer to events of twenty thousand years ago and yet be very largely as it had been originally. The more valued and the more carefully preserved particular information is, the more long-lasting and accurate it may be."
"The key word is particular. What the Book may care to preserve may not be what you wish to have preserved and what a robot may remember best may be what you wish him to remember least."
Seldon said in despair, "In whatever direction I turn to seek a way of working out psychohistory, matters so arrange themselves as to make it impossible. Why bother trying?"
"It might seem hopeless now," said Hummin unemotionally, "but given the necessary genius, a route to psychohistory may be found that none of us would at this moment expect. Give yourself more time.--But were coming to a rest area. Let us pull off and have dinner."
Over the lamb patties on rather tasteless bread (most unpalatable after the fare at Mycogen), Seldon said, "You seem to assume, Hummin, that I am the possessor of the necessary genius. I may not be, you know."
Hummin said, "Thats true. You may not be. However, I know of no alternate candidate for the post, so I must cling to you."
And Seldon sighed and said, "Well, Ill try, but Im out of any spark of hope. Possible but not practical, I said to begin with, and Im more convinced of that now than I ever was before."
Heatsink
AMARYL, YUGO-- ... A mathematician who, next to Hari Seldon himself, may be considered most responsible for working out the details of psychohistory. It was he who ...
... Yet the conditions under which he began life are almost more dramatic than his mathematical accomplishments. Born into the hopeless poverty of the lower classes of Dahl, a sector of ancient Trantor, he might have passed his life in utter obscurity were it not for the fact that Seldon, quite by accident, encountered him in the course of ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第六十章
　　他们终于回到一条隧道内。当夫铭与谢顿驾着出租飞车，从皇区前往川陀大学时，就曾经穿越过这样一条隧道。如今他们置身于另一条隧道，正从麦曲生前往……谢顿不知道要去哪里。他不太敢开口发问，夫铭的脸庞像是花岗岩雕出来的，最好别说话招惹他。
夫铭坐在这辆四座飞车的前座，右边的座位是空的，谢顿与铎丝则分坐在后座两侧。
谢顿对看来闷闷不乐的铎丝试探性地笑了笑：“能再穿上真正的衣服真好，埘吧？”
“我再也不要——”铎丝以极其正经的口吻说，“穿上或看到任何像裰服的东西。而且不论在仟何情况下，我绝对不要再戴上人皮帽。事实上，即使再看到一个普通的秃子，我都会有一种奇怪的感觉。”
谢顿一直不愿开口提的那个问题，最后由铎丝问了出来。“契特，”她以颇为暴躁的口气说，“你为何不告诉我们要到哪里去？”
夫铭挪到侧面的位置，然后回过头来，以严肃的表情望着铎丝与谢顿。“到某处去，”他说，“一个你们或许不容易惹麻烦的地方，但我不确定这种地方是否存在。”
铎丝立刻像是泄了气似的。“事实上，契特，这都是我的错。在斯璀璘的时候，我让哈里一个人到穹顶上去；而在麦曲生，我虽然陪他一起冒险，可是我根本就不该让他进入圣堂。”
“我当时心意已决，”谢顿热切地说，“那绝不是铎丝的错。”
夫铭并未评断两人该各受多少责难，他只是说：“我猜你是想去看那个机器人。有没有一个好理由？你能告诉我吗？”
谢顿感到自己脸红了：“这件事我错了，夫铭。我并未见到我预期的，或是希望见到的东西，要是事先知道长老阁里有些什么，我绝对懒得到那里去。这次真可说是一败涂地。”
“可是，谢顿，你希望见到的是什么呢？请告诉我。有需要的话不妨慢慢说，这是一趟长途旅行。我愿意洗耳恭听。”
“事情是这样的，夫铭。我得到一些概念：世上有人形机器人存在，它们的寿命很长，至少有一个可能还活着，而它可能就往长老阁中。那里的确有个机器人，但它却是金属制品，已经死了，而且仅是一种象征。我要是早知道……”
“没错，我们要是都早知道，任何种类的问题或研究便一概没有必要。有关人形机器人的数据，你是从哪里获得的？既然没有任何麦曲生人会和你讨论这种事，我只能想到一个来源：麦曲生的典籍，古奥罗拉语和银河标准语对照的电动印刷书。我说对了吗？”
“没错。”
“你是怎么拿到的？”
顿了一下之后，谢顿喃喃说道：“这件事有些令人脸红。”
“我没那么容易脸红，谢顿。”
于是谢顿一五一十告诉了他。夫铭听完后，脸上掠过一丝很淡的笑容。
夫铭说：“难道你就没想到，这一切必定是个哑谜游戏？没有姐妹会做那种事，除非是奉命，而且经过极力劝说。”
谢顿皱起眉头，粗暴地说：“这点根本不是显而易见，人们随时随地会有违常的举动。你咧嘴笑笑倒很容易，我没有你所掌握的情报，铎丝也不知道。如果你不希望我落入陷阱，就该事先警告我哪里有圈套。”
“我同意，我收回刚才的话。无论如何，那本典籍已经不在你身上，我可以肯定。”
“没错，日主十四把它拿走了。”
“你读了多少内容？”
“只有一小部分，我没多少时间。那是一本大书，而且我得告诉你，夫铭，它实在无聊极了。”
“没错，这我知道，因为我想这本书我比你读的还多。它不只无聊，而且完全不足采信。它是麦曲生官方单方面的历史观，主要目的是为了阐扬那个史观，并非提出理性客观的论述。在某些地方，它甚至故意语焉不详，好让外人即使有机会读到这本典籍，也永远无法完全了解读的是什么。比方说，令你感兴趣的有关机器人的记载，你认为内容究竟是些什么？”
“我已经告诉过你。他们提到人形机器人，从外表看来，这些机器人无法和真人区分。”
“它们总共有多少？”夫铭问，
“他们没有说。至少，我没发现哪一段记载着数量。也许为数不多，但是其中有一个，典籍中称之为‘变节者’。它似乎具有负面意义，但我无法查出是什么意思。”
“这点你完全没告诉我，”铎丝插嘴道，“假如你说了，我就会告诉你它并非专有名词，而是另一个古老的词汇，和银河标准语中的‘叛徒’意思差不多。不过这个古词具有更可怕的意义，叛徒对叛变行径多少还会遮掩，可是变节者却会大肆夸耀。”
夫铭说：“我把古代语文的细节留给你研究，铎丝。不过无论如何，假如那个变节者果真存在，又假如它是个人形机器人，那么显而易见的是，身为一名叛徒和敌人，它不会被保存和供奉在长老阁中。”
谢顿说：“我原本不知道变节者的意义，但正如我所说，我得到的印象是，它是敌非友。我想它后来可能被打败了，将它保存下来是为了纪念麦曲生的胜利。”
“典籍中提到变节者被打败了吗？”
“没有，但也许是我漏读了那一部分……”
“不太可能。麦曲生的任何胜利必定会在典籍中大肆宣扬，而且会一而再、再而三地提及。”
“关于这个变节者，典籍中还提到另外一点，”谢顿以迟疑的口气说，“但我无法绝对确定我看懂了。”
夫铭说：“正如我告诉你的——他们有时故意含糊其辞。”
“然而，他们似乎提到，那个变节者有办法利用……或影响人类的情感。”
“任何政治人物都能做到，”夫铭耸了耸肩，“它叫做领袖魅力——只要奏效的话。”
谢顿叹了一声：“嗯，当初我偏偏愿意相信，事情就是这样。那时为了找到一个古代的人形机器人，我情愿付出很高的代价，只要它仍旧活着，而且我能向它发问。”
“为了什么目的？”夫铭问。
“我想了解太初银河社会的细节。它当时只包含少数几个世界，从这么小的一个银河中，心理史学比较容易推导出来。”
夫铭说：“你确定能相信道听途说的事吗？经过上万年的时间，你还愿意信赖那个机器人的早期记忆？那里面会有多少扭曲？”
“说得没错，”铎丝突然说．“这就像我跟你提过的那些计算机化记录，哈里。日久天长，机器人的那些记忆会慢慢被抛舟、遗失、清除、扭曲。你只能追溯到某个限度，而且越往前追溯，那些数据就变得越不可靠——不论你怎么做都没用。”
“难道就没有町能，”谢顿若有所思地说，“某些数据由于特别的原因，而会一直保存下来？麦曲生典籍记载的一部分，很可能是两万年前的事迹，而其中绝大部分都是第一手史料。越是珍贵、越是谨慎保存的特殊资料，就越能持久且越为正确。”
“关键在于‘特殊’两个字。那本典籍想要保存的资料，不一定是你希望保存的；一个机器人记得最清楚的事，说不定是你最不希望它记得的。”
谢顿以绝望的口吻说：“不论我朝哪个方向寻找建立心理史学的方法，到头来总是变得绝无可能。何必再自找麻烦呢？”
“现在似乎是没有希望，”夫铭以毫无情绪的语调说，“但只要有必要的天分，也许我们终能找到一条通往心理史学的大道，它是大家此时此刻无法预见的。再多给你自己一些时间——我们就要到一个休息区，让我们开出去吃顿晚餐。”
在吃羔羊肉饼的时候（外面的面包平淡无味，尤其在吃惯麦曲生的美食后，更令人觉得难以消受），谢顿说：“你似乎做了一项假设，夫铭，我就是那个‘必要天分’的拥有者。你该知道，我也许不是。”
夫铭说：“这倒是真的，你也许不是。然而，我不知道还有其他的替代人选，所以我必须抓着你不放。”
谢顿叹了一口气：“好吧，我会试试看，但我已看不见任何希望的火花。有可能却不切实际，我一开始就这么说，现在我比任何时候更加确信。”
Chapter 61
The Emperor of all the Galaxy felt weary--physically weary. His lips ached from the gracious smile he had had to place on his face at careful intervals. His neck was stiff from having inclined his head this way and that in a feigned show of interest. His ears pained from having to listen. His whole body throbbed from having to rise and to sit and to turn and to hold out his hand and to nod. It was merely a state function where one had to meet Mayors and Viceroys and Ministers and their wives or husbands from here and there in Trantor and (worse) from here and there in the Galaxy. There were nearly a thousand present, all in costumes that varied from the ornate to the downright outlandish, and he had had to listen to a babble of different accents made the worse by an effort to speak the Emperors Galactic as spoken at the Galactic University. Worst of all, the Emperor had had to remember to avoid making commitments of substance, while freely applying the lotion of words without substance. All had been recorded, sight and sound--very discreetly--and Eto Demerzel would go over it to see if Cleon, First of that Name, had behaved himself. That, of course, was only the way that the Emperor put it to himself. Demerzel would surely say that he was merely collecting data on any unintentional self-revelation on the pan of the guests. And perhaps he was. Fortunate Demerzel!
The Emperor could not leave the Palace and its extensive grounds, while Demerzel could range the Galaxy if he wished. The Emperor was always on display, always accessible, always forced to deal with visitors, from the important to the merely intrusive. Demerzel remained anonymous and never allowed himself to be seen inside the Palace grounds. He remained merely a fearsome name and an invisible (and therefore the more frightening) presence. The Emperor was the Inside Man with all the trappings and emoluments of power. Demerzel was the Outside Man, with nothing evident, not even a formal title, but with his fingers and mind probing everywhere and asking for no reward for his tireless labors but one--the reality of power.
It amused the Emperor--in a macabre sort of way--to consider that, at any moment, without warning, with a manufactured excuse or with none at all, he could have Demerzel arrested, imprisoned, exiled, tortured, or executed. After all, in these annoying centuries of constant unrest, the Emperor might have difficulty in exerting his will over the various planets of the Empire, even over the various sectors of Trantor--with their rabble of local executives and legislatures that he was forced to deal with in a maze of interlocking decrees, protocols, commitments, treaties, and general interstellar legalities--but at least his powers remained absolute over the Palace and its grounds. And yet Cleon knew that his dreams of power were useless. Demerzel had served his father and Cleon could not remember a time when he did not turn to Demerzel for everything. It was Demerzel who knew it all, devised it all, did it all. More than that, it was on Demerzel that anything that went wrong could be blamed. The Emperor himself remained above criticism and had nothing to fear--except, of course, palace coups and assassination by his nearest and dearest. It was to prevent this, above all, that he depended upon Demerzel. Emperor Cleon felt a tiny shudder at the thought of trying to do without Demerzel. There had been Emperors who had ruled personally, who had had a series of Chiefs of Staff of no talent, who had had incompetents serving in the post and had kept them--and somehow they had gotten along for a time and after a fashion.
But Cleon could not. He needed Demerzel. In fact, now that the thought of assassination had come to him--and, in view of the modern history of the Empire, it was inevitable that it had come to him--he could see that getting rid of Demerzel was quite impossible. It couldnt be done. No matter how cleverly he, Cleon, would attempt to arrange it, Demerzel (he was sure) would anticipate the move somehow, would know it was on its way, and would arrange, with far superior cleverness, a palace coup. Cleon would be dead before Demerzel could possibly be taken away in chains and there would simply be another Emperor that Demerzel would serve--and dominate.
Or would Demerzel tire of the game and make himself Emperor? Never! The habit of anonymity was too strong in him. If Demerzel exposed himself to the world, then his powers, his wisdom, his luck (whatever it was) would surely desert him. Cleon was convinced of that. He felt it to be beyond dispute.
So while he behaved himself, Cleon was safe. With no ambitions of his own, Demerzel would serve him faithfully.
And now here was Demerzel, dressed so severely and simply that it made Cleon uneasily conscious of the useless ornamentation of his robes of state, now thankfully removed with the aid of two valets. Naturally, it would not be until he was alone and in dishabille that Demerzel would glide into view. "Demerzel," said the Emperor of all the Galaxy, "I am tired!"
"State functions are tiring, Sire," murmured Demerzel.
"Then must I have them every evening?"
"Not every evening, but they are essential. It gratifies others to see you and to be taken note of by you. It helps keep the Empire running smoothly."
"The Empire used to be kept running smoothly by power," said the Emperor somberly. "Now it must be kept running by a smile, a wave of the hand, a murmured word, and a medal or a plaque."
"If all that keeps the peace, Sire, there is much to be said for it. And your reign proceeds well."
"You know why--because I have you at my side. My only real gift is that I am aware of your importance." He looked at Demerzel slyly. "My son need not be my heir. He is not a talented boy. What if I make you my heir?"
Demerzel said freezingly, "Sire, that is unthinkable. I would not usurp the throne. I would not steal it from your rightful heir. Besides, if I have displeased you, punish me justly. Surely, nothing I have done or could possibly do deserves the punishment of being made Emperor."
Cleon laughed. "For that true assessment of the value of the Imperial throne, Demerzel, I abandon any thought of punishing you. Come now, let us talk about something. I would sleep, but I am not yet ready for the ceremonies with which they put me to bed. Let us talk."
"About what, Sire?"
"About anything.--About that mathematician and his psychohistory. I think about him every once in a while, you know. I thought of him at dinner tonight. I wondered: What if a psychohistorical analysis would predict a method for making it possible to be an Emperor without endless ceremony?"
"I somehow think, Sire, that even the cleverest psychohistorian could not manage that."
"Well, tell me the latest. Is he still hiding among those peculiar baldheads of Mycogen? You promised you would winkle him out of there."
"So I did, Sire, and I moved in that direction, but I regret that I must say that I failed."
"Failed?" The Emperor allowed himself to frown. "I dont like that."
"Nor I, Sire. I planned to have the mathematician be encouraged to commit some blasphemous act--such acts are easy to commit in Mycogen, especially for an outsider--one that would call for severe punishment. The mathematician would then be forced to appeal to the Emperor and, as a result, we would get him. I planned it at the cost of insignificant concessions on our part--important to Mycogen, totally unimportant to us--and I meant to play no direct role in the arrangement. It was to be handled subtly."
"I dare say," said Cleon, "but it failed. Did the Mayor of Mycogen "He is called the High Elder, Sire."
"Do not quibble over titles. Did this High Elder refuse?"
"On the contrary, Sire, he agreed and the mathematician, Seldon, fell into the trap neatly."
"Well then?"
"He was allowed to leave unharmed."
"Why?" said Cleon indignantly.
"Of this I am not certain, Sire, but I suspect we were outbid."
"By whom? By the Mayor of Wye?"
"Possibly, Sire, but I doubt that. I have Wye under constant surveillance. If they had gained the mathematician, I would know it by now."
The Emperor was not merely frowning. He was clearly enraged. "Demerzel, this is bad. I am greatly displeased. A failure like this makes me wonder if you are perhaps not the man you once were. What measures shall we take against Mycogen for this clear defiance of the Emperors wishes?"
Demerzel bowed low in recognition of the storm unleashed, but he said in steely tones, "It would be a mistake to move against Mycogen now, Sire. The disruption that would follow would play into the hands of Wye."
"But we must do something."
"Perhaps not, Sire. It is not as bad as it may seem."
"How can it be not as bad as it seems?"
"Youll remember, Sire, that this mathematician was convinced that psychohistory was impractical."
"Of course I remember that, but that doesnt matter, does it? For our purposes?"
"Perhaps not. But if it were to become practical, it would serve our purposes to an infinitely great extent, Sire. And from what I have been able to find out, the mathematician is now attempting to make psychohistory practical. His blasphemous attempt in Mycogen was, I understand, part of an attempt at solving the problem of psychohistory. In that case, it may pay us, Sire, to leave him to himself. It will serve us better to pick him up when he is closer to his goal or has reached it."
"Not if Wye gets him first."
"That, I shall see to it, will not happen."
"In the same way that you succeeded in winkling the mathematician out of Mycogen just now?"
"I will not make a mistake the next time, Sire," said Demerzel coldly.
The Emperor said, "Demerzel, you had better not. I will not tolerate another mistake in this respect." And then he added pettishly, "I think I shall not sleep tonight after all."
第六十一章
第十三部 热闾
雨果•阿马瑞尔：——数学家，除了哈里•谢顿本人之外，他可算是对心理史学具体内容最有贡献的一位。是他……然而与他的数学成就比较起来，他的早年境况几乎更为传奇。他生于古川陀的达尔区，属于毫无希望的贫困低下阶级。
若非谢顿在相当意外的情况下遇到他，终其一生他都可能过着寒微的日子。
谢顿当时……
——《银河百科全书》


第六十一章
统治整个银河的皇帝感到一股倦意——生理上的倦意。他的嘴唇酸痛，因为他必须在适当时候将亲切的笑容摆在脸上；他的颈部僵硬，因为他刚才不断以各种角度低下头来，装出一副很感兴趣的样子；由于听觉得不到休息，他的耳朵感到疼痛；由于不得不常常起立、坐下、转身、伸手、点头，他整个身子都累得微微颤抖。
这只不过是一场国宴，但他得接见来自川陀各个角洛，还有（更糟的是）来自银河各个角落的众多区长、总督、部长以及他们的妻子或夫君。出席者将近一千人，都穿着各地的传统服装，从华丽无比到全然怪异应有尽有。此外，他还得忍受各种口音的唠叨，更糟的是他们都模仿帝国大学通用的银河标准语，只因那是皇上使用的语言。而最头痛的一件事则是：身为皇上，他在随口说些毫无内容的空话时，必须牢记避免做出任何实质的许诺。
一切都被非常谨慎地记录下来，包括影像与声音。事后伊图•丹莫茨尔会从头到尾看一遍，看看克里昂大帝一世是否行止得宜——这一点当然只是皇上自己的见解。丹莫茨尔一定会说，他只是在搜集客人无意中自行泄露的各种资料，或许他说的是真话。
幸运的丹莫刺尔！
皇上不能离开皇宫与外围的御苑，而丹莫扶尔只要愿意，随时都能遍巡银河。皇上总是陈列在皇宫，总是随时候教，总是被迫应酬一些访客——从真正重要的到不速之客都有。丹莫茨尔则始终销声匿迹，从不在皇宫御苑内让人看见。他只保持着一个令人生畏的名字，以及一个隐形（因此更为可怕）的存在。
皇上是权力的核心，亭有权力的一切外表与实惠。丹莫刺尔在权力的外围，表而上看来一无所有，甚至没有一个正式的头衔，但他的指掌与心灵却能探寻各个角落。他对自己的孜孜不倦别无所求，唯一要求的奖赏便是权力的本质。
皇上突然有个开心的想法——一种带有死亡气息的开心。他想到无论任何时候，在毫无预警的情况下，或是炮制一个供口，或是什么借口也不用，他都能将丹莫茨尔逮捕、监禁、放逐、严刑拷打或是处决。毕竟，在过去数个动荡不断的恼人世纪中，皇帝或许难以将意志延伸到帝国各行星上，甚至想在川陀各区贯彻也难——地方行政机关与立法机关满是乱臣贼子，使他每天必须面对千丝万缕、纠缠不清的无数法令、草案、约定、条约，以及一般性的星际法案。但是，至少在皇宫与御苑范围内，他仍旧拥有至高无上的绝对权力。
然而克里昂心知肚明，他的权力美梦根本徒劳无功。丹莫茨尔是父皇的老臣，在克里昂的记忆中，自已遇到任何问题总是转向丹莫茨尔求助，从来没有一次例外。了解一切、筹划、七刀、执行一切的都是丹其茨尔。更重要的是，假如任何事出了纰漏，都可以怪罪到丹莫茨尔头上。皇上本人高高在上，永远不受批判，因此心中毫无畏惧——当然也有例外，那就是担心发生宫廷政变，自己被最亲、最近的人行刺。而这一点正是他仰仗丹莫茨尔最重要的原因。
将丹莫茨尔除掉，自己接掌一切的念头，令克里昂大帝感到全身做微打颤。过去，的确有些皇帝亲自治理帝国，他们的行政首长个个是庸才。他们让无能之荤占着这个职位，从米不想撤换——而在短时间内，他们竟然也能凑合着应付过去。
可是克里昂不行，他需要丹莫茨尔。事实上，既然他想到了行刺的可能性——鉴于帝国近代史．他心中兴起这种念头是必然的——他能看出除掉丹莫茨尔是相当不可能的事，根本就做不到。不论他，克里昂，以多么高明的手法暗中部署，丹莫茨尔总有办法（他确定）预见这个行动，会知道它正在默默进行，会以高明许多倍的手腕，安排一场宫廷政变。在丹莫茨尔有可能被五花大绑押走之前，克里昂自己就会丧命。然后很快会出现另一个皇帝，丹莫茨尔将继续侍奉他——并且驾驭他。
或者丹莫茨尔会厌倦了这种游戏，自己做起皇帝来？
绝对不会！他隐身幕后的习惯太过根深蒂固。假若丹莫茨尔让自己在世上曝光，那么他的权力、他的智慧、他的运气（不论那是什么）必将弃他而去。克里昂深信这点，觉得毋庸置疑。
所以只要安分守己，克里昂就安全无虞。因为丹莫茨尔本人并无野心，他会忠心地侍奉自己。
现在丹莫茨尔就在这里，他的穿着如此简单朴素，使克里昂对自己礼袍上那些无用的装饰生出不安的感觉，还好刚才在两个侍仆的帮助下，他已经把礼袍脱下来了。自然，总要等到他一人独处，并且换上便装之后，丹莫茨尔这个角色才会翩然出场。
“丹莫茨尔，”统治整个银河的皇帝说，“我累了！”
“国宴是一件累人的事，陛下。”丹莫茨尔喃喃地说。
“那我必须每天晚上来一场吗？”
“井非每天晚上，但它们是很重要的。能亲自觐见您以及让您注意到的人，都会感到心满意足。这能帮助帝国的运作保持一帆风顺。”
“过去，帝国是靠权力来保持一帆风顺。”皇上以阴郁的口吻说，“如今，却必须以一个微笑、一个挥手的动作，一句低声的言语，以及一枚勋章或奖章来保持运作。”
“如果这些能保持太平，陛下，那就非常值得这么做。而您的统治一向相当成功。”
“你知道为什么吗——因为我有你在我的身旁。我唯一真正的天赋．就是了解你的重要性。”他以狡猾的眼光望着丹莫茨尔，“我的儿子不一定要做我的继位者，他不是个才能出众的孩子。我让你当我的继位者如何？”
丹莫茨尔以冷冰冰的门吻说：“陛下，您怎么会有这种念头呢？我绝不会篡夺皇位，不会将它从合法继位者手中偷走。此外，若是我得罪了您，请以公平的方式惩处我。无论如何，我所做过的一切，或是可能做的任何事，都没有严重到需要以皇位作为惩罚。”
克里昂哈哈大笑：“冲着你对皇位的价值所做的真实评价，丹莫茨尔，我打消一切想要处罚你的念头。好啦，让我们谈一谈。待会儿我将要就寝，但我现存还不准备接受侍候我上床的那些繁文缛节。让我们聊聊吧。”
“聊些什么，陛下？”
“聊任何事情——聊聊那个数学家和他的心理史学。我每隔一段时间就会想到他，你知道吗。今晚在晚宴上我又想到他，我暗自嘀咕：心理史学分析若是能预测出一个方法，能让我这个皇帝避免无休无止的繁文缛节，那会是什么样的局面？”
“我却有一个想法，陛下，即使最高明的心理史学家也无法做到这点。”
“好吧，告诉我最新状况。他仍旧躲在麦曲生那些古怪的光头之间吗？你答应过我，你会把他从那里揪出来。”
“我的确答应过，陛下，我曾经朝这方面进行。但是很遗憾，我必须承认我失败了。”
“失败了？”皇上皱起眉头，“我不喜欢这种事。”
“我也不喜欢，陛下。我计划引诱那个数学家做出某种亵渎行为，会遭致严重惩罚的那种——在麦曲生很容易触犯亵渎罪，尤其对一个外族人而言。然后，那个数学家会被迫向皇上上诉，这样一来，我们就能得到他。根据我的计划，我们付出的代价只是微不足道的让步——对麦曲生很重要，对我们完仝无关痛痒。在我的部署中，我未打算直接参与，而是要巧妙地操纵这次行动。”
“我也这么想，”克里昂说道，“但是它失败了。难道是麦曲生的区长……”
“他被尊称为元老，陛下。”
“别跟我争辩头衔，这个元老拒绝合作吗？”
“恰恰相反，陛下，他一口答应了。而那个数学家，谢顿，一下子就掉进陷阱里。”
“那后来呢？”
“他获准离开，毫发无损。”
“为什么？”克里昂气冲冲地说。
“这件事我还不确定，陛下，但我怀疑有人出更高的价。”
“什么人？卫荷区长吗？”
“有可能，陛下，可是我对这点存疑。我将卫荷置于不断监视之下，假如他们得到那个数学家，我现在就应该知道了。”
此时皇上不只是皱眉，他显然火冒三丈：“丹莫茨尔，这太糟了，我非常不高兴。像这样子的失败，令我不禁怀疑你是否变成了另一个人。麦曲生这种显然违抗皇帝意旨的行为，我们应该采取什么手段教训一番？”
丹莫茨尔察觉一股奔腾的怒火，赶紧深深弯下腰来，但仍以钢铁般坚定的语气说：“现在对麦曲生采取行动将是个错误，陛下。因此造成的分裂，会被卫荷收为渔翁之利。”
“但我们必须做点什么。”
“或许什么都不该做，陛下，事态不如表而看来那么糟。”
“怎么会不如表面看来那么糟？”
“您应该记得，陛下，这个数学家深信心理史学不切实际。”
“我当然记得这点，可是这根本不重要，对不对？对我们的目的而言？”
“或许是吧。但假使它能变得可行，对我们的帮助将会大得难以估量，陛下。而根据我所能查出的线索，那个数学家正试图使心理史学成为可行。他在麦曲生的亵渎行为，据我了解，是他试图解决心理史学问题的努力之一。在这种情况下，陛下，我们暂时不去碰他。当他接近或达到目标的时候，我们再把他抓起来，这样对我们会更有用。”
“要是卫荷先得到他就不会了。”
“这件事我会盯牢，确保它不会发生。”
“就像你刚刚成功地将那个数学家揪出麦曲生一样？”
“下次我不会再犯错了，陛下。”丹莫茨尔冷静地说。
皇上说道：“丹莫茨尔，你最妤不会。在这件事情上，我绝不再容忍另一个错误。”
然后，他又没好气地补充一句：“我看今晚我根本别睡了。”
Chapter 62

Jirad Tisalver of the Dahl Sector was short. The top of his head came up only to Hari Seldons nose. He did not seem to take that to heart, however. He had handsome, even features, was given to smiling, and sported a thick black mustache and crisply curling black hair.
He lived, with his wife and a half-grown daughter, in an apartment of seven small rooms, kept meticulously clean, but almost bare of furnishings. Tisalver said, "I apologize, Master Seldon and Mistress Venabili, that I cannot give you the luxury to which you must be accustomed, but Dahl is a poor sector and I am not even among the better-off among our people."
"The more reason," responded Seldon, "that we must apologize to you for placing the burden of our presence upon you."
"No burden, Master Seldon. Master Hummin has arranged to pay us generously for your use of our humble quarters and the credits would be welcome even if you were not--and you are."
Seldon remembered Hummins parting words when they finally arrived in Dahl. "Seldon" he had said, "this is the third place Ive arranged as sanctuary. The first two were notoriously beyond the reach of the Imperium, which might well have served to attract their attention; after all, they were logical places for you. This one is different. It is poor, unremarkable, and, as a matter of fact, unsafe in some ways. It is not a natural refuge for you, so that the Emperor and his Chief of Staff may not think to turn their eyes in this direction. Would you mind staying out of trouble this time, then?"
"I will try, Hummin," said Seldon, a little offended. "Please be aware that the trouble is not of my seeking. I am trying to learn what may well take me thirty lifetimes to learn if I am to have the slightest chance of organizing psychohistory."
"I understand," said Hummin. "Your efforts at learning brought you to Upperside in Streeling and to the Elders aerie in Mycogen and to who can guess where in Dahl. As for you, Dr. Venabili, I know youve been trying to take care of Seldon, but you must try harder. Get it fixed in your head that he is the most important person on Trantor--or in the Galaxy, for that matter--and that he must be kept secure at any cost."
"I will continue to do my best," said Dors stiffly. "And as for your host family, they have their peculiarities, but they are essentially good people with whom I have dealt before. Try not to get them in trouble either."
But Tisalver, at least, did not seem to anticipate trouble of any kind from his new tenants and his expressed pleasure at the company he now had--quite apart from the rent credits he would be getting--seemed quite sincere. He had never been outside Dahl and his appetite for tales of distant places was enormous. His wife too, bowing and smiling, would listen and their daughter, with a finger in her mouth, would allow one eye to peep from behind the door. It was usually after dinner, when the entire family assembled, that Seldon and Dors were expected to talk of the outside world. The food was plentiful enough, but it was bland and often tough. So soon after the tangy food of Mycogen, it was all but inedible.
The "table" was a long shelf against one wall and they ate standing up. Gentle questioning by Seldon elicited the fact that this was the usual situation among Dahlites as a whole and was not due to unusual poverty. Of course, Mistress Tisalver explained, there were those with high government jobs in Dahl who were prone to adopt all kinds of effete customs like chairs--she called them "body shelves"--but this was looked down upon by the solid middle class. Much as they disapproved of unnecessary luxury, though, the Tisalvers loved hearing about it, listening with a virtual storm of tongue-clicking when told of mattresses lifted on legs, of ornate chests and wardrobes, and of a superfluity of tableware.
They listened also to a description of Mycogenian customs, while Jirad Tisalver stroked his own hair complacently and made it quite obvious that he would as soon think of emasculation as of depilation. Mistress Tisalver was furious at any mention of female subservience and flatly refused to believe that the Sisters accepted it tranquilly.
They seized most, however, on Seldons. casual reference to the Imperial grounds. When, upon questioning, it turned out that Seldon had actually seen and spoken to the Emperor, a blanket of awe enveloped the family. It took a while before they dared ask questions and Seldon found that he could not satisfy them. He had not, after all, seen much of the grounds and even less of the Palace interior.
That disappointed the Tisalvers and they were unremitting in their attempts to elicit more. And, having heard of Seldons Imperial adventure, they found it hard to believe Dorss assertion that, for her part, she had never been anywhere in the Imperial grounds. Most of all, they rejected Seldons casual comment that the Emperor had talked and behaved very much as any ordinary human being would. That seemed utterly impossible to the Tisalvers. After three evenings of this, Seldon found himself tiring. He had, at first, welcomed the chance to do nothing for a while (during the day, at least) but view some of the history book-films that Dors recommended. The Tisalvers turned over their book-viewer to their guests during the day with good grace, though the little girl seemed unhappy and was sent over to a neighbors apartment to use theirs for her homework.
"It doesnt help," Seldon said restlessly in the security of his room after he had piped in some music to discourage eavesdropping. "I can see your fascination with history, but its all endless detail. Its a mountainous heap--no, a Galactic heap--of data in which I cant see the basic organization."
"I dare say," said Dors, "that there must have been a time when human beings saw no organization in the stars in the sky, but eventually they discovered the Galactic structure."
"And Im sure that took generations, not weeks. There must have been a time when physics seemed a mass of unrelated observations before the central natural laws were discovered and that took generations.--And what of the Tisalvers?"
"What of them? I think theyre being very nice."
"Theyre curious."
"Of course they are. Wouldnt you be if you were in their place?"
"But is it just curiosity? They seem to be ferociously interested in my meeting with the Emperor."
Dors seemed impatient. "Again ... its only natural. Wouldnt you be--if the situation was reversed?"
"It makes me nervous."
"Hummin brought us here."
"Yes, but hes not perfect. He brought me to the University and I was maneuvered Upperside. He brought us to Sunmaster Fourteen, who entrapped us. You know he did. Twice bitten, at least once shy. Im tired of being questioned."
"Then turn the tables, Hari. Arent you interested in Dahl?"
"Of course. What do you know about it to begin with?"
"Nothing. Its just one of more than eight hundred sectors and Ive only been on Trantor a little over two years."
"Exactly. And there are twenty-five million other worlds and Ive been on this problem only a little over two months.--I tell you. I want to go back to Helicon and take up a study of the mathematics of turbulence, which was my Ph.D. problem, and forget I ever saw--or thought I saw--that turbulence gave an insight into human society."
But that evening he said to Tisalver, "But you know, Master Tisalver, youve never told me what you do, the nature of your work."
"Me?" Tisalver placed his fingers on his chest, which was covered by the simple white T-shirt with nothing underneath, which seemed to be the standard male uniform in Dahl. "Nothing much. I work at the local holovision station in programming. Its very dull, but its a living."
"And its respectable," said Mistress Tisalver. "It means he doesnt have to work in the heatsinks."
"The heatsinks?" said Dors, lifting her light eyebrows and managing to look fascinated.
"Oh well," said Tisalver, "thats what Dahl is best known for. It isnt much, but forty billion people on Trantor need energy and we supply a lot of it. We dont get appreciated, but Id like to see some of the fancy sectors do without it."
Seldon looked confused. "Doesnt Trantor get its energy from solar power stations in orbit?"
"Some," said Tisalver, "and some from nuclear fusion stations out on the islands and some from microfusion motors and some from wind stations Upperside, but half"--he raised a finger in emphasis and his face looked unusually grave--"half comes from the heatsinks. There are heatsinks in lots of places, but none--none--as rich as those in Dahl. Are you serious that you dont know about the heatsinks? You sit there and stare at me."
Dors said quickly, "We are Outworlders, you know." (She had almost said tribespeople, but had caught herself in time.) "Especially Dr. Seldon. Hes only been on Trantor a couple of months."
"Really?" said Mistress Tisalver. She was a trifle shorter than her husband, was plump without quite being fat, had her dark hair drawn tightly back into a bun, and possessed rather beautiful dark eyes. Like her husband, she appeared to be in her thirties.
(After a period in Mycogen, not actually long in duration but intense, it struck Dors as odd to have a woman enter the conversation at will. How quickly modes and manners establish themselves, she thought, and made a mental note to mention that to Seldon--one more item for his psychohistory.) "Oh yes," she said. "Dr. Seldon is from Helicon."
Mistress Tisalver registered polite ignorance. "And where might that be?"
Dors said, "Why, its--" She turned to Seldon. "Where is it, Hari?" Seldon looked abashed. "To tell you the truth, I dont think I could locate it very easily on a Galactic model without looking up the coordinates. All I can say is that its on the other side of the central black hole from Trantor and getting there by hypership is rather a chore."
Mistress Tisalver said, "I dont think Jirad and I will ever be on a hypership."
"Someday, Casilia," said Tisalver cheerfully, "maybe we will. But tell us about Helicon, Master Seldon."
Seldon shook his head. "To me that would be dull. Its just a world, like any other. Only Trantor is different from all the rest. There are no heatsinks on Helicon--or probably anywhere else--except Trantor. Tell me about them."
("Only Trantor is different from all the rest." The sentence repeated itself in Seldons mind and for a moment he grasped at it, and for some reason Dorss hand-on-thigh story suddenly recurred to him, but Tisalver was speaking and it passed out of Seldons mind as quickly as it had entered.)
Tisalver said, "If you really want to know about heatsinks, I can show you." He turned to his wife. "Casilia, would you mind if tomorrow evening I take Master Seldon to the heatsinks."
"And me," said Dors quickly.
"And Mistress Venabili?"
Mistress Tisalver frowned and said sharply, "I dont think it would be a good idea. Our visitors would find it dull."
"I dont think so, Mistress Tisalver," said Seldon ingratiatingly. "We would very much like to see the heatsinks. We would be delighted if you would join us too ... and your little daughter--if she wants to come."
"To the heatsinks?" said Mistress Tisalver, stiffening. "Its no place at all for a decent woman."
Seldon felt embarrassed at his gaffe. "I meant no harm, Mistress Tisalver."
"No offense," said Tisalver. "Casilia thinks its beneath us and so it is, but as long as I dont work there, its no distress merely to visit and show it to guests. But it is uncomfortable and I would never get Casilia to dress properly."
They got up from their crouching positions. Dahlite "chairs" were merely molded plastic seats on small wheels and they cramped Seldons knees terribly and seemed to wiggle at his least body movement. The Tisalvers, however, had mastered the art of sitting firmly and rose without trouble and without needing to use their arms for help as Seldon had to. Dors also got up without trouble and Seldon once again marveled at her natural grace.
Before they parted to their separate rooms for the night, Seldon said to Dors, "Are you sure you know nothing about heatsinks? Mistress Tisalver makes them seem unpleasant."
"They cant be that unpleasant or Tisalver wouldnt suggest taking us on tour. Lets be content to be surprised."
第六十二章
　　达尔区的吉拉德•堤沙佛个子矮小，他的头顶只到谢顿的鼻尖。然而，他似乎没将这件事放在心上。他有一副英俊、端正的五官，总喜欢带着微笑，而且留着两撇又浓又黑的八字胡，以及一头波浪状的卷曲黑发。
他与他的妻子，以及一个半大的女儿，住在一栋有七个小房间的公寓中。他们小心翼翼地将这个家保持得很干净，但里面几乎没有什么家具。
堤沙佛说：“我很抱歉，谢顿老爷、凡纳比里夫人，你们一定习惯了豪华的生活，我却不能为你们提供那些享受。不过达尔是个穷地方，而我在我们同胞中也不能算混得好的。”
“正因为如此，”谢顿答道，“我们更是必须向你致歉，我们的出现给你带来很大负担。”
“没有负担，谢顿老爷。为了你们使用我们简陋的房舍，夫铭老爷慷慨地愿意付一大笔租金。即使我不欢迎你们，也会欢迎那些信用点——我只是开玩笑。”
谢顿还记得他们来到达尔后，夫铭在临别时说的一番话：“谢顿，”他说，“这是我帮你找的第三个避难所。前面那两个地方，都是出了名的皇帝势力不及之她，因此很有可能吸引他们的注意。毕竟对你而言，它们是合理的藏身之地。这个地方则不同，它相当贫穷，毫不起眼，而且事实上，可说并非十分安全。它不是你寻求庇护的自然选择，因此皇上和他的行政首长，也许不会想到将目光转到这个方向。所以说，这次你愿意别再惹麻烦吗？”
“我会努力的，夫铭。”谢顿有点不高兴，“请你明白一件事，我想找的并不是是麻烦。即使我有创立心理史学的一点点机会，我试图探寻的也很可能是需要三十辈子才能寻获的知识。”
“我了解，”夫铭说，“你为寻找答案所做的努力，把你带到了斯璀璘的穹顶上，以及麦曲生的长老阁中，谁能猜到你在达尔还会去哪里。至于你，凡纳比里博士，我知道你一直试图照顾谢顿，可是你必须更加努力。请务必记得，谢顿博士是川陀上最重要的人，甚至可说是全银河最重要的人物，你必须不计任何代价保护他的安全。”
“我会尽力而为。”铎丝以生硬的语气说。
“至于堤沙佛一家，我以前跟他们打过交道，他们有他们奇怪的地方，但他们本质上都是好人。你们也要尽量别给他们惹上麻烦。”
不过，至少堤沙佛似乎并未预期新房客会带来任何麻烦。他对他们的到来所表现的喜悦，似乎相当真诚——几乎与他将得到的租金无关。
他从未踏出过达尔，因此对远方的传闻胃口极大；总是点头哈腰、笑容满面的堤沙佛夫人也喜欢听。至于他们的女儿，则照例吮着一根于指，从门后露出一只眼睛偷窥。
通常是在晚餐后，当全家人聚在一起的时候，他们就会请求谢顿与铎丝讲述外面的世界。食物餐餐丰盛，不过淡而无味，而且总是相当粗糙。由于不久前才享受过香味扑鼻的麦曲生食品，两人感到这种食物几乎难以下咽。“餐桌”只是紧靠墙壁的一个长架子，所有的人全都站着进餐。
谢顿以委婉的方式问出了真相，原来这在达尔是相当寻常的状况，并非由于特别贫穷的缘故。当然，堤沙佛夫人解释道，达尔也有些身居政府高位的人，他们倾向于接受各种文明的习俗，比如说椅子——她称之为“身体架子”。不过，纯粹的中产阶级都瞧不起那些东西。
虽然他们对于没必要的奢侈不敢苟同，堤沙佛一家却很爱听这类叙述。当他们听到由脚架撑起的床垫、华丽的橱柜与衣橱，以及摆满餐桌的餐具时，总是一个劲地啧啧称奇。
他们也听到了有关麦曲生习俗的描述。当时，吉拉德•堤沙佛得意地摸摸自己的头发，意思显然是宁可去死也不愿接受脱毛手术。每当提到女性百依百顺时，堤沙佛大人总是气愤难当，根本拒绝相信姐妹们会默默接受这些待遇。
然而，他们最不放过的一点，则是谢顿随口提到的皇宫御苑。在进一步追问之下，他们发现谢顿不但亲眼见过皇上，并且还跟皇上说过话，一股敬畏的气氛立刻笼罩这一家人。过了好一会儿，他们才敢继续发问，谢顿却发觉自己无法满足他们。毕竟，他并未对御苑多做浏览，皇宫内部就更别提了。
这使得堤沙佛家人相当失望，于是他们穷追不舍。试图问出更多事情。在谢顿讲完他的皇宫历险之后，锋丝却声明自己从未踏进御苑一步，这令他们实在难以置信。谢顿曾经顺口说到，皇上的言行举止与普通人非常相近，这点他们尤其拒绝接受，对堤沙佛一家而言，那似乎是绝不可能的事。
经过三个这样的晚上之后，谢顿开始生厌。最初，他很高兴有机会暂时什么事也不做（至少白天如此），只是阅读几本铎丝推荐的历史胶卷书。堤沙佛家人表现得很大方，白天将他们自已的阅读机让给客人。只是小女孩似乎不太高兴，因为她被父母送到邻居的公寓，借用别人的阅读机做功课。
“这没有任何帮助。”谢顿烦躁不安地说，此时他关在自己房间，并弄出一些音乐以防有人窃听。“我可以看出你对历史如何着迷．但它全是无休无止的细节，是堆积如山——不，堆积如银河的数据，我根本无法看出它的基本规律。”
“我敢说，”铎丝说道，“过去一定曾有一段时期，人类看不出天上的星星有什么组织，但他们终究发现了银河结构。”
“我确信这得花上好些世代，并非仅仅几周的时间。过去也一定曾有一段时期，在核心自然定律发现之前，物理学似乎只是一堆毫无关联的观察结果，那些发现也需要许多世代——堤沙佛这家人是怎么回事？”
“他们又怎么了，我认为他们一直很不错。”
“他们太过好奇。”
“他们当然会，假如你是他们，难道你不会吗？”
“但那仅仅是好奇吗？他们对于我见过皇上这档事，好像有兴趣得不得了。”
铎丝似乎不耐烦了：“同理……这只是自然反应。难道你不会吗，要是刚好倒过来的话？”
“这使我神经紧张。”
“是夫铭把我们带到这儿来的。”
“没错，但他并非十全十美。他把我带去川陀大学，结果我被诱骗到穹顶上去；他带我们去找日主十四，那人却陷害我们，你该知道他早有预谋。上两次当，至少能学一次乖。我受够了被问东问西。”
“那就反客为主，哈里。你对达尔没有兴趣吗？”
“当然有，你原先对它了解多少？”
“一无所知。它不过是八百多个区之一，而我在川陀只有两年多一点。”
“正是如此。银河中有两千五百万个世界，而我研究这个问题才只有两个月多一点。我告诉你，我想要回赫利肯去，重新着于研究湍流的数学，那是我的博士论文题目。我要忘掉我曾经看出——或是自以为看出——湍流能对人类社会提供一种洞察。”
不过当天傍晚，他还是问堤沙佛说：“你可知道，堤沙佛老爷，你从未告诉我你做些什么、你的工作性质。”
“我？”堤沙佛将几根手指按在胸口。他穿着一件单薄的白色短衫，里面什么也没有，这似乎是达尔男性的标准制服。“没做什么，我在地方全息电视台做节日策划。非常无聊的差事，但我靠它养家糊口。”
“而且是个体面的职业，”堤沙佛夫人说，“这代表他不必在热闾工作。”
“热闾？”铎丝扬起淡淡的眉毛，显得很有兴趣。
“啊，”堤沙佛说，“那是达尔最出名的东西。虽然没什么，但川陀四百亿人口都需要能源，而我们提供其中很大一部分。没有人感谢我们，可是我倒真想看看，某些高级区失去能源后是什么情景。”
谢顿显得相当困惑：“川陀的能源不是来自轨道上的太阳能发电站吗？”
“部分而已，”堤沙佛说，“此外，部分来自一些岛上的核融合发电站，部分来自微融合发电机，部分来自穹顶上的风力发电站。可是有一半，”他举起一根手指加强语气，而且表情严肃异常？“有一半来自热闾。许多地方都有热闾，但没有一处——没有一处——像达尔的蕴藏这般丰富。你当真不知道热闾是什么吗？你坐住那里瞪着我猛瞧。”
铎丝很快接门道：“我们是外星人士，你也知道。”（她差一点就要说“外族人”，但及时煞住车。）“尤其是谢顿博士，他在川陀只待了几个月。”
“真的吗？”堤沙佛夫人说。她比她的丈夫稍矮一点，丰满伊不算肥胖，拥有一对相当美丽的黑眼珠。她的黑发梳在脑后，紧紧扎成一个发髻。就像她的丈夫一样，她看来也是三十几岁。
（在麦曲生住过一阵子之后，虽然并非真待了很久，但由于密集式的耳濡目染，如今对铎丝而言，女性随意加入男性的交谈是件很奇怪的事。风俗与习惯很容易不知不觉地建立起来，她想，并且在心中默记下这点，准备找机会对谢顿提一提，为他的心理史学再加上一条。）
“喔，是的。”她说，“谢顿博士来自赫利肯。”
堤沙佛夫人礼貌地表现出孤陋寡闻：“那是在哪里呢？”
铎丝说：“啊，它在……”她转向谢顿，“它究竟在哪里，哈里？”
谢顿显得难为情：“告诉你们一句实话，如果不查坐标，我想我也不容易在银河模型中找到它的位置。我只能说从川陀看心去，它位于中心黑洞的另一侧，搭超空间飞船到那里只是小事一桩。”
堤沙佛夫人说：“我想吉拉德和我永远不会登上超空间飞船。”
“总有一天，卡西莉娅，”堤沙佛以快活的口气说，“或许我们会有机会。但请对我们说说赫利肯，谢顿老爷。”
谢顿摇了摇头：“对我来说那是一件无聊的事。它只不过是个世界，就像任何世界一样，只有川陀才和其他所有世界不同。赫利肯上没有热闾，也许其他地方都没有，唯有川陀例外。告诉我有关热闾的种种。”
（“只有川陀才和其他所有世界不同。”这句话在谢顿心中一再重复，而有刹那的时间，它几乎在他的掌握中。不知道为什么，铎丝那个毛手毛脚的故事突然再度浮现。但由于堤沙佛已开始说话，那点灵光来得急也去得快，随即溜出了谢顿的心灵。）
堤沙佛说：“如果你真的想要了解热闾，我可以带你去参观。”他转头面向妻子，“卡西莉娅，如果明天傍晚我带谢顿老爷前往热闾，你会不会介意？’’“还有我。”铎丝立刻加上一句。
“还有凡纳比里夫人？”
堤沙佛夫人皱起眉头，以尖锐的声音说：“我认为那不是什么好主意，我们的客人会觉得很无聊。”
“我想不至于，堤沙佛夫人。”谢顿以逢迎的口气说，“我们非常希望去看看热闾，如果你也加入我们，我们会十分高兴……还有你的小女儿，如果她也想去的话。”
“到热闾去？”堤沙佛夫人的态度转趋强硬，“那根本不是一位端庄的妇人能去的地方。”
谢顿对自己的鲁莽感到尴尬：“我没有恶意，堤沙佛夫人。”
“没关系，”堤沙佛说，“卡西莉娅认为它是个低贱之地，事实也的确如此。但只要我不在那里工作，光是带客人参观一下倒无妨。不过那里很不舒服，卡西莉娅也找不到合适的衣服可穿。”
聊完之后，他们便从蹲伏的位置站起来。达尔的“椅子”只是个塑料坐垫，下面装了几个小轮子。谢顿的膝盖被它弄得几乎无法动弹，而且只要他的身子稍有挪动，这椅子似乎就会开始摆动。然而，堤沙佛一家却练就稳如泰山的本事，起身时也毫无困难，不像谢顿那样得借助手臂。铎丝也轻而易举就站起来，谢顿再次赞叹她表现的自然优雅。
在他们回到各自的房间就寝之前，谢顿对铎丝说：“你确定自己对热闾一无所知吗？听堤沙佛夫人的口气似乎不会怎么有趣。”
“应该不会无聊到什么程度，否则堤沙佛不会建议要带我们参观。让我们期待一场惊奇吧。”
Chapter 63
Tisalver said, "Youll need proper clothing." Mistress Tisalver sniffed markedly in the background.
Cautiously, Seldon, thinking of kirtles with vague distress, said, "What do you mean by proper clothing?"
"Something light, such as I wear. A T-shirt, very short sleeves, loose slacks, loose underpants, foot socks, open sandals. I have it all for you."
"Good. It doesnt sound bad."
"As for Mistress Venabili, I have the same. I hope it fits."
The clothes Tisalver supplied each of them (which were his own) fit fine--if a bit snugly. When they were ready, they bade Mistress Tisalver good-bye and she, with a resigned if still disapproving air, watched them from the doorway as they set off.
It was early evening and there was an attractive twilight glow above. It was clear that Dahls lights would soon be winking on. The temperature was mild and there were virtually no vehicles to be seen; everyone was walking. In the distance was the ever-present hum of an Expressway and the occasional glitter of its lights could be easily seen.
The Dahlites, Seldon noted, did not seem to be walking toward any particular destination. Rather, there seemed to be a promenade going on, a walking for pleasure. Perhaps, if Dahl was an impoverished sector, as Tisalver had implied, inexpensive entertainment was at a premium and what was as pleasant--and as inexpensive--as an evening stroll?
Seldon felt himself easing automatically into the gait of an aimless stroll himself and felt the warmth of friendliness all around him. People greeted each other as they passed and exchanged a few words. Black mustaches of different shape and thickness flashed everywhere and seemed a requisite for the Dahlite male, as ubiquitous as the bald heads of the Mycogenian Brothers. It was an evening rite, a way of making sure that another day had passed safely and that ones friends were still well and happy. And, it soon became apparent, Dors caught every eye. In the twilight glow, the ruddiness of her hair had deepened, but it stood out against the sea of black-haired heads (except for the occasional gray) like a gold coin winking its way across a pile of coal.
"This is very pleasant," said Seldon.
"It is," said Tisalver. "Ordinarily, Id be walking with my wife and shed be in her element. There is no one for a kilometer around whom she doesnt know by name, occupation, and interrelationships. I cant do that. Right now, half the people who greet me ... I couldnt tell you their names. But, in any case, we mustnt creep along too slowly. We must get to the elevator. Its a busy world on the lower levels."
They were on the elevator going down when Dors said, "I presume, Master Tisalver, that the heatsinks are places where the internal heat of Trantor is being used to produce steam that will turn turbines and produce electricity."
"Oh, no. Highly efficient large-scale thermopiles produce electricity directly. Dont ask me the details, please. Im just a holovision programmer. In fact, dont ask anyone the details down there. The whole thing is one big black box. It works, but no one knows how."
"What if something goes wrong?"
"It doesnt usually, but if it does, some expert comes over from somewhere. Someone who understands computers. The whole thing is highly computerized, of course."
The elevator came to a halt and they stepped out. A blast of heat struck them.
"Its hot," said Seldon quite unnecessarily.
"Yes, it is," said Tisalver. "Thats what makes Dahl so valuable as an energy source. The magma layer is nearer the surface here than it is anywhere else in the world. So you have to work in the heat."
"How about air-conditioning?" said Dors.
"There is air-conditioning, but its a matter of expense. We ventilate and dehumidify and cool, but if we go too far, then were using up too much energy and the whole process becomes too expensive."
Tisalver stopped at a door at which he signaled. It opened to a blast of cooler air and he muttered, "We ought to be able to get someone to help show us around and hell control the remarks that Mistress Venabili will otherwise be the victim of ... at least from the men."
"Remarks wont embarrass me," said Dors.
"They will embarrass me," said Tisalver.
A young man walked out of the office and introduced himself as Hano Linder. He resembled Tisalver quite closely, but Seldon decided that until he got used to the almost universal shortness, swarthiness, black hair, and luxuriant mustaches, he would not be able to see individual differences easily.
Lindor said, "Ill be glad to show you around for what there is to see. Its not one of your spectaculars, you know." He addressed them all, but his eyes were fixed on Dors. He said, "Its not going to be comfortable. I suggest we remove our shirts."
"Its nice and cool in here," said Seldon.
"Of course, but thats because were executives. Rank has its privileges. Out there we cant maintain air-conditioning at this level. Thats why they get paid more than I do. In fact, those are the best-paying jobs in Dahl, which is the only reason we get people to work down here. Even so, its getting harder to get heatsinkers all the time." He took a deep breath. "Okay, out into the soup." He removed his own shirt and tucked it into his waistband. Tisalver did the same and Seldon followed suit.
Linder glanced at Dors and said, "For your own comfort, Mistress, but its not compulsory."
"Thats all right," said Dors and removed her shirt.
Her brassiere was white, unpadded, and showed considerable cleavage. "Mistress," said Lindor, "Thats not--" He thought a moment, then shrugged and said, "All right. Well get by."
At first, Seldon was aware only of computers and machinery, huge pipes, flickering lights, and flashing screens.
The overall light was comparatively dim, though individual sections of machinery were illuminated. Seldon looked up into the almost-darkness. He said, "Why isnt it better lit?"
"Its lit well enough ... where it should be," said Lindor. His voice was well modulated and he spoke quickly, but a little harshly. "Overall illumination is kept low for psychological reasons. Too bright is translated, in the mind, into heat. Complaints go up when we turn up the lights, even when the temperature is made to go down."
Dors said, "It seems to be well computerized. I should think the operations could be turned over to computers altogether. This sort of environment is made for artificial intelligence."
"Perfectly right," said Lindor, "but neither can we take a chance on any failures. We need people on the spot if anything goes wrong. A malfunctioning computer can raise problems up to two thousand kilometers away."
"So can human error. Isnt that so?" said Seldon.
"Oh. yes, but with both people and computers on the job, computer error can be more quickly tracked down and corrected by people and, conversely, human error can be more quickly corrected by computers. What it amounts to is that nothing serious can happen unless human error and computer error take place simultaneously. And that hardly ever happens."
"Hardly ever, but not never, eh?" said Seldon. "Almost never, but not never. Computers arent what they used to be and neither are people."
"Thats the way it always seems," said Seldon, laughing slightly.
"No, no. Im not talking memory. Im not talking good old days. Im talking statistics."
At this, Seldon recalled Hummin talking of the degeneration of the times.
"See what I mean?" said Lindor, his voice dropping. "Theres a bunch of people, at the C-3 level from the looks of them, drinking. Not one of them is at his or her post."
"What are they drinking?" asked Dors.
"Special fluids for replacing electrolyte loss. Fruit juice."
"You cant blame them, can you?" said Dors indignantly. "In this dry heat, you would have to drink."
"Do you know how long a skilled C-3 can spin out a drink? And theres nothing to be done about it either. If we give them five-minute breaks for drinks and stagger them so they dont all congregate in a group, you simply stir up a rebellion."
They were approaching the group now. There were men and women (Dahl seemed to be a more or less amphisexual society) and both sexes were shirtless. The women wore devices that might be called brassieres, but they were strictly functional. They served to lift the breasts in order to improve ventilation and limit perspiration, but covered nothing.
Dors said in an aside to Seldon, "That makes sense, Hari. Im soaking wet there."
"Take off your brassiere, then," said Seldon. "I wont lift a finger to stop you."
"Somehow," said Dors, "I guessed you wouldnt." She left her brassiere where it was.
They were approaching the congregation of people--about a dozen of them.
Dors said, "If any of them make rude remarks, I shall survive."
"Thank you," said Lindor. "I cannot promise they wont.--But Ill have to introduce you. If they get the idea that you two are inspectors and in my company, theyll become unruly. Inspectors are supposed to poke around on their own without anyone from management overseeing them." He held up his arms.
"Heatsinkers, I have two introductions to make. We have visitors from outside--two Outworlders, two scholars. Theyve got worlds running short on energy and theyve come here to see how we do it here in Dahl. They think they may learn something."
"Theyll learn how to sweat!" shouted a heatsinker and there was raucous laughter.
"Shes got a sweaty chest right now," shouted a woman, "covering up like that." Dors shouted back, "Id take it off, but mine cant compete with yours."
The laughter turned good-natured.
But one young man stepped forward, staring at Seldon with intense deep-set eyes, his face set into a humorless mask. He said, "I know you. Youre the mathematician."
He ran forward, inspecting Seldons face with eager solemnity. Automatically, Dors stepped in front of Seldon and Lindor stepped in front of her, shouting, "Back, heatsinker. Mind your manners."
Seldon said, "Wait! Let him talk to me. Why is everyone piling in front of me?"
Lindor said in a low voice, "If any of them get close, youll find they dont smell like hothouse flowers."
"Ill endure it," said Seldon brusquely. "Young man, what is it you want?"
"My name is Amaryl. Yugo Amaryl. Ive seen you on holovision."
"You might have, but what about it?"
"I dont remember your name."
"You dont have to."
"You talked about something called psychohistory."
"You dont know how I wish I hadnt."
"What?"
"Nothing. What is it you want?"
"I want to talk to you. Just for a little while. Now."
Seldon looked at Lindor, who shook his head firmly. "Not while hes on his shift."
"When does your shift begin, Mr. Amaryl?" asked Seldon.
"Sixteen hundred."
"Can you see me tomorrow at fourteen hundred?"
"Sure. Where?"
Seldon turned to Tisalver. Would you permit me to see him in your place?"
Tisalver looked very unhappy. "Its not necessary. Hes just a heatsinker."
Seldon said, "He recognized my face. He knows something about me. He cant be just an anything. Ill see him in my room." And then, as Tisalvers face didnt soften, he added, "My room, for which rent is being paid. And youll be at work, out of the apartment."
Tisalver said in a low voice, "Its not me, Master Seldon. Its my wife, Casilia. She wont stand for it."
"Ill talk to her," said Seldon grimly. "Shell have to."
第六十三章
　　堤沙佛说：“你们需要适当的服装。”堤沙佛夫人则在背后发出一声明显的哼声。
细心的谢顿立刻想到裰服，心中泛起一阵模糊的懊恼。他说：“你说适当的服装是什么崽思？”
“轻便的衣服，像我穿的这种。袖子很短的短衫、宽松的家常裤、宽松的内衣拆、短袜、开口的凉鞋。我都为你们准备好了。”
“很好，听起来不错。”
“至于凡纳比里夫人，我也同样准备了一套，希望能合身。”
堤沙佛提供他们两人的服装（都是他自己的）十分合身，甚至可以说十分舒适。他们准备好之后，便向堤沙佛夫人告辞，她则带着仍不以为然却已放弃努力的神情，站在门口目送他们离去。
此时是傍晚时分，上空有一团迷人的昏黄暮光，显然达尔的灯火很快会纷纷眨眼。温度适中，街上几于见不到任何车辆，每个人都在步行。远处传来磁浮捷运无休无止的嗡嗡声，偶尔射来的灯光也不难看见。
谢顿注意到，这些达尔人似乎并非向特定目的地走去。反之，他们像是参加一次漫步游行，纯粹为了乐趣而走。假如达尔果真是个穷区，就像堤沙佛暗示的那样，则低廉的娱乐或许是很重要的一件事。还有什么比黄昏漫步更有乐趣，而且更廉价的呢？
谢顿很自然地融入这种毫无目标的闲适步调中，并且感到四周充满亲切的温暖。当人们擦身而过时，总会瓦相打个招呼，简单交谈几句。不同型式、不同粗细的黑色八字胡到处展现，仿佛是达尔男性的一项必备要件，如同麦曲生兄弟的光头一样无处不在。
这是个傍晚的仪式，用以确定又安稳过了一天，朋友们仍旧身体健康、精神愉快。有一件事很快变得显而易见，那就是铎丝吸引了所有人的日光。昏黄的暮色中，她略红的金发变得更加鲜红，在一片黑发海洋的衬托下（偶尔出现的灰发是唯一的例外），像一枚金币闪闪发光地掠过一堆煤炭。
“这实在非常愉快。”
“没错，”堤沙佛说，“通常，我都和我的妻了一起散步，她总是如鱼得水。在一公里范围内，任何人的名字、职业，以及互相之间的关系她都晓得。我做不到这点，现在这个时候，和我打招呼的人有一半……我无法告诉你他们的名字。但无论如何，我们绝不能走得太慢，我们必须走到升降机那里。底下的层级是个忙碌的世界。”
当他们进了往下的升降机后，铎丝说道：“我想所谓的热闾，堤沙佛老爷，是利用川陀的地热来产生蒸汽，以转动涡轮机来发电的地方。”
“噢，并非如此，这里是利用高效率的大型热电堆直接产生电力。别问我细节，拜托，我只是个全息电视节目策划人。事实上，到下面也别向任何人询问细节。整个东西是个很大的黑盒子，它能够运作，却没人知道是如何做到的。”
“如果出了什么问题呢？”
“通常都不会，但如果真出了问题，会有一些专家从别处赶来，那些懂得计算机的。当然，所有一切都是高度计算机化的。”
此时升降机停了下来，三人鱼贯而出，一阵热浪立刻扑向他们。
“真热。”谢顿多此一举地说。
“的确没错，”堤沙佛说，“这正是达尔成为能源珍贵产地的原因。这里的岩浆层比全球各处都更接近地表，所以你得在酷热之下工作。”
“何不采用空调设备呢？”
“是有空凋设备，不过这和成本有关。我们利用空调来通风、除湿、降温，但如果做得太过分，那会用掉太多能量，整个过程就会变得太昂贵。”
堤沙佛停在一扇门前，按下讯号钮。门开了之后，随即传出一阵凉风。他喃喃说道：“我们应该可以找到什么人，带我们四下参观一番。他能控制场面，否则凡纳比里夫人会被……至少男工就一定会对她冷嘲热讽。”
“冷嘲热讽不会令我感到尴尬。”铎丝说。
“会令我感到尴尬。”堤沙佛说。
一名自称汉诺•林德的年轻男子从办公室走出来，他长得跟堤沙佛十分相像，但谢顿心里明白，在他习惯几乎千篇一律的矮小身材、黝黑皮肤、黑色头发，以及浓密的八字胡之前，他无法轻易看出其中的个别差异。
林德说：“我很乐意带你们到值得看的地方四处看看。这不是你们心目中的奇观，你们要知道。”他在对他们三人说话，目光却固定在铎丝身上。“不会怎么舒服，我建议大家脱掉短衫。”
“这里十分凉爽。”谢顿说。
“当然，但那是因为我们是管理人员，阶级自有它的特权。在外面我们无法保持这么强的空调，这就是为什么他们领的薪水比我还多。事实上，在达尔它是薪资最高的工作，这是我们这里找得到工人的唯一原因。即使如此，热闾工还是一直越来越难找。”他深深吸了一口气，“好，我们钻进热锅去吧。”
他脱掉短衫，塞进腰带。堤沙佛也照做不误，谢顿则只有学样。
林德瞥了铎丝一眼，说道：“为你自己舒服，夫人，但这并非强迫性的。”
“没关系。”铎丝说完，便脱下她的短衫。
她的胸罩是白色的，没有衬里，中间开衩处颇为可观。
“夫人，”林德说，“那可不是……”他想了一会儿，然后耸耸肩，“没关系，我们过得了关。”
刚开始的时候，谢顿只注意到计算机与机械装置，包括巨大的输送管、明灭不定的灯光，以及闪烁的荧光幕。
整体的光线相当暗淡，不过机件附近都有充足的照明。谢顿抬起头，望着几乎全暗的环境说：“为什么不要亮一点？”
“已经够亮了——就这个地方而言。”林德说。他的话讲抑扬有致，说得极快，但口气有点严厉。“整体照明保持如此是基于心理因素，太亮的话会在心中将光转换成热。要是我们把灯光调亮，即使将温度降低些，工人的抱怨也会升高。”
铎丝说：“这里似乎十分计算机化。我认为整个的运作都能交由计算机负责，这种环境是人工智能的天下。”
“完全正确，”林德说，“可是我们不敢冒这个险。如果有任何事情不对劲，我们需要随时有人在场。一台故障计算机引起的问题，可以影响到两千公里之外。”
“人为错误也一样糟，难道不是这样吗？”尉顿说。
“昵，是的，不过既然人类和计算机一块工作，计算机错误可以较快找出原因，再由人工进行矫正；反之借着计算机，人为错误也能较快修正回来。这就等于说，除非同时出现人为错误和计算机错误，否则不会发生任何严重问题，事实上，这种情况几乎从未发生过。”
“几乎从未发生过，但并非从来没有过，是吗？”谢顿说。
“几乎没有，但并非从来没有。计算机今非昔比，而人也一样。”
“世事似乎总是如此。”谢顿说完，轻轻笑了一声。
“噢，不，我没有怀旧的意思，我不是在说过去的美好时光，我指的是统计数据。”
听到这里，谢顿再度想起夫铭所说的有关时代正在衰退的那番话。
“懂我的意思了吧？”林德的音量逐渐降低，“那边有一-群人，从他们的样子看来是 C三层的。他们正在喝饮料，没一个在工作岗位上。”
“他们在喝什么？”铎丝问道。
“补充电解质流失的特殊饮料，果汁。”
“那你就不能怪他们，”铎丝愤愤地说道，“在这种又干又热的环境中，人们当然得喝点东西。”
“你知道一个熟练的 C三工人，借口喝罐饮料可以磨多少时间？而且，我们根本一点办法也没有。如果只给他们五分钟时间喝水，并且将每个工人的休息时间错开，好让他们不会全部聚成一群，就等于挑起一场叛变。”
现在他们正朝那群人走去。这些工人有男有女（达尔似乎多少是个两性平等社会），不论男女都未穿短衫。女性上身穿戴着一种装置，勉强可称为胸罩，但纯粹是功能性的。它的功用是撑起乳房，以增进通风效果，并降低排汗量，可是什么也遮不住。
铎丝凑近谢顿说：“这样穿有道理，哈里，我那里已经湿透了。”
“那就脱下你的胸罩，”谢顿说，“我不会举一根手指阻止你。”
“不知怎么回事，”铎丝说．“我就猜到你不会。”她还是让胸罩留在原处。
他们渐渐接近那群人——总共有十一二个。
铎丝说：“如果他们之中有人冒出粗言粗语，我会挺得住。”
“谢谢你，”林德说，“我不能保证他们不会——但我必须介绍你们。如果他们误以为你们两人是督察员，而且是在我的陪同之下，他们会变得无法无天。督察员应该自已独立四处探访，不能有任何管理部门的人在旁监督。”
他举起双臂：“热闾工们，我为你们介绍两个人。他们是来自外界的访客——两位外星人士，两位学者。他们的世界能源日渐短缺，他们来到这里，想要看看我们达尔是怎么做的。他们认为也许能学到些什么。”
“他们会学到如何流汗。”一名热闾工喊道，接着响起一阵刺耳的笑声。
“那女的现在已经满胸是汗，”一名女广吼道，“那样子遮掩起来。”
铎丝吼了回去：“我想把它脱下，但我的胸部没法跟你比。”笑声随即转趋友善。
不料一名年轻男工向前走来，一双深陷的眼睛紧紧盯着谢顿，他的脸孔则变作毫无表情的面具。他说：“我认识你，你是那个数学家。”
他冲过来，以急切而严肃的态度审视着谢顿的而孔。铎丝自然而然站到谢顿前面，林德则站到她的身前，并且吼道：“退下去，热闾工，注意你的礼貌。”
谢顿说：“慢着！让他和我讲话。为什么每个人都排在我面前？”
林德压低声音说：“如果他们任何一个走近，你会发觉他们的味道可不像温室的花朵。”
“我受得了，”谢顿直率地说，“年轻人，你想要做什么？”
“我名叫阿马瑞尔。雨果•阿马瑞尔。我曾在全息电视上看过你。”
“你或许看过，可是又怎么样？”
“我不记得你的名字。”
“你不必记得。”
“你提到一种叫心理史学的东西。”
“你不知道我多希望从未提过。”
“什么？”
“没什么，你到底要做什么？”
“我想跟你谈谈。只要一下子，就是现在。”
谢顿望向林德，后者坚决地摇了摇头：“在他值班时绝对不行。”
“你的班从什么时候开始，阿马瑞尔先生？”谢顿问道。
“一六○○时。”
“你能在明天一四○○时来见我吗？”
“当然可以，哪里？”
谢顿转头望向堤沙佛：“你能准我在你那里见他吗？”
堤沙佛看来非常不高兴：“没这个必要，他只是个热闾工。”
谢顿说：“他认出我的长相，他知道我的一些事。他不可能只是个普通人，我要在我的房间见他。”
然后，由于堤沙佛的脸孔并未软化，他又补充道：“在我的房间，房租迟早会付给你。而你当时正在上班，不在那栋公寓里。”
堤沙佛低声说道：“不是我，谢顿老爷。是我的妻子，卡西莉娅，她不会接受这种事。”
“我会跟她谈，”谢顿绷着脸说道，“她一定得接受。”
Chapter 64

Casilia Tisalver opened her eyes wide. "A heatsinker? Not in my apartment."
"Why not? Besides, hell be coming to my room," said Seldon. "At fourteen hundred."
"I wont have it," said Mistress Tisalver. "This is what comes of going down to the heatsinks. Jirad was a fool."
"Not at all, Mistress Tisalver. We went at my request and I was fascinated. I must see this young man, since that is necessary to my scholarly work."
"Im sorry if it is, but I wont have it."
Dors Venabili raised her hand. "Hari, let me take care of this. Mistress Tisalver, if Dr. Seldon must see someone in his room this afternoon, the additional person naturally means additional rent. We understand that. For today, then, the rent on Dr. Seldons room will be doubled."
Mistress Tisalver thought about it. "Well, thats decent of you, but its not only the credits. Theres the neighbors to think of. A sweaty, smelly heatsinker--"
"I doubt that hell be sweaty and smelly at fourteen hundred, Mistress Tisalver, but let me go on. Since Dr. Seldon must see him, then if he cant see him here, hell have to see him elsewhere, but we cant run here and there. That would be too inconvenient. Therefore, what we will have to do is to get a room elsewhere. It wont be easy and we dont want to do it, but we will have to. So we will pay the rent through today and leave and of course we will have to explain to Master Hummin why we have had to change the arrangements that he so kindly made for us."
"Wait." Mistress Tisalvers face became a study of calculation. "We wouldnt like to disoblige Master Hummin ... or you two. How long would this creature have to stay?"
"Hes coming at fourteen hundred. He must be at work at sixteen hundred. He will be here for less than two hours, perhaps considerably less. We will meet him outside, the two of us, and bring him to Dr. Seldons room. Any neighbors who see us will think he is an Outworlder friend of ours."
Mistress Tisalver nodded her head. "Then let it be as you say. Double rent for Master Seldons room for today and the heatsinker will visit just this one time."
"Just this one time," said Dors.
But later, when Seldon and Dors were sitting in her room, Dors said, "Why do you have to see him, Hari? Is interviewing a heatsinker important to psychohistory too?"
Seldon thought he detected a small edge of sarcasm in her voice and he said tartly, "I dont have to base everything on this huge project of mine, in which I have very little faith anyway. I am also a human being with human curiosities. We were down in the heatsinks for hours and you saw what the working people there were like. They were obviously uneducated. They were low-level individuals--no play on words intended--and yet here was one who recognized me. He must have seen me on holovision on the occasion of the Decennial Convention and he remembered the word psychohistory. He strikes me as unusual--as out of place somehow--and I would like to talk to him."
"Because it pleases your vanity to have become known even to heatsinkers in Dahl?"
"Well ... perhaps. But it also piques my curiosity."
"And how do you know he hasnt been briefed and intends to lead you into trouble as has happened before."
Seldon winced. "I wont let him run his fingers through my hair. In any case, were more nearly prepared now, arent we? And Im sure youll be with me. I mean, you let me go Upperside alone, you let me go with Raindrop Forty-Three to the microfarms alone, and youre not going to do that again, are you?"
"You can be absolutely sure I wont," said Dors.
"Well then, Ill talk to the young man and you can watch out for traps. I have every faith in you."
第六十四章
　　卡西莉娅•堤沙佛睁大了眼睛：“一个热闾工？不准进我的公寓。”
“为什么不准？何况，他会直接进我的房间。”谢顿说，“在一四○○时。”
“我就是不要，”堤沙佛夫人说，“这就是去热闾招惹的麻烦，吉拉德是个笨蛋。”
“根本不是，堤沙佛夫人。我们是在我的要求下前去的，而且我叹为观止。我必须见这个年轻人，那对我的学术工作很有必要。”
“如果这样的话，我感到很抱歉，但我就是不要。”
铎丝•凡纳比里举起一只手：“哈里，让我来处理吧。堤沙佛夫人，如果谢顿博士今天下午必须在他的房里见一个人，多一个人自然代表得多付房租，这点我们了解。所以说，谢顿博士今天的房租将会加倍。”
堤沙佛夫人想了一想：“嗯，你们真是宽宏大量，但这不只是信用点的问题，我还得考虑邻居怎么想。一个满身是汗、臭气冲天的热闾工……”
“我不信他在一四○○时会满身是汗、臭气冲天，堤沙佛夫人，但请让我继续说下去。既然谢顿博土非见他不可，那么假使不能在这里见他，他们必须找别的地方会面。可是我们不能跑来跑去，那样实在太不方便。因此，我们必须做的是在别处找个房间。这不会是件容易的事，我们也不想那样做，可是我们别无选择。所以我们会将房租付到今天，然后离开这里。当然啦，我们必须向夫铭老爷解释，他好心好意帮我们做的安排，我们为何不得不临时更改。”
“等一下，”堤沙佛夫人的脸变作精打细算的模样，“我们不希望得罪夫铭老爷——或是你们两位。那东西得待多久？”
“他会在一四○○时来到，而他必须在一六○○时上工。他在这里待不到两小时，也许还短得多。我们会在外面迎接他，我们两个一起，然后把他带到谢顿博士的房间。任何邻居要是看到我们，都会认为他是我们的外星世界朋友。”
堤沙佛夫人点了点头：“那就照你说的办吧。今天谢顿老爷的房租加倍。那热闾工只准来这么一次。”
“下不为例。”铎丝说。
但是一会儿之后，当谢顿与铎丝坐在她的房间时，铎丝却问道：“你为什么必须见他，哈里？会晤一个热闾工对心理史学有那么重要吗？”
谢顿认为她话语里带着一丝讥讽，他以锋利的口吻说：“我不必每件事都打着我这个伟大计划的招牌，反正我对它没什么信心。我是个有血有肉的人．具有人类的好奇心。我们下到热闾待了几个小时，你自己看到那些工人是什么样子。他们显然没受过教育，他们是低级的群众——我不打算玩文字游戏，然而这个人却认出我来。他一定是我在出席十年会议时，从全息电视上看到我的，而且他还记得心理史学这个名称。他令我感到很不寻常，总之是很不相称，我希望能跟他聊一聊。”
“因为连达尔的热间工都认识你，满足了你的虚荣心？”
“这……或许吧。但它同样引起了我的好奇心。”
“你怎么知道他不是奉命而来，打算引你步入陷阱，像前两次那样。”
谢顿怔了一怔：“我不会让他碰到我的半根头发。无论如何，我们这回几乎有了万全准备，对不对？而且我能确定，这次你会待在我身边。我的意思是说，你让我单独到穹顶上去，又让我单独和雨点四三到微生农场，但你再也不会这样做了，是吗？”
“你可以绝对肯定我再也不会。”铎丝说。
“好吧，那么让我和这个年轻人谈谈，由你负责注意可疑的陷阱。我对你有百分之百的信心。”
Chapter 65

Amaryl arrived a few minutes before 1400, looking warily about. His hair was neat and his thick mustache was combed and turned up slightly at the edges. His T-shirt was startlingly white. He did smell, but it was a fruity odor that undoubtedly came from the slightly overenthusiastic use of scent. He had a bag with him.
Seldon, who had been waiting outside for him, seized one elbow lightly, while Dors seized the other, and they moved rapidly into the elevator. Having reached the correct level, they passed through the apartment into Seldons room. Amaryl said in a low hangdog voice, "Nobody home, huh?"
"Everyones busy," said Seldon neutrally. He indicated the only chair in the room, a pad directly on the floor.
"No," said Amaryl. "I dont need that. One of you two use it." He squatted on the floor with a graceful downward motion.
Dors imitated the movement, sitting on the edge of Seldons floor-based mattress, but Seldon dropped down rather clumsily, having to make use of his hands and unable, quite, to find a comfortable position for his legs. Seldon said, "Well, young man, why do you want to see me?"
"Because youre a mathematician. Youre the first mathematician I ever saw--close up--so I could touch him, you know."
"Mathematicians feel like anyone else."
"Not to me, Dr. ...         Seldon?"
"Thats my name."
Amaryl looked pleased. "I finally remembered.--You see, I want to be a mathematician too."
"Very good. Whats stopping you?"
Amaryl suddenly frowned. "Are you serious?"
"I presume something is stopping you. Yes, Im serious."
"Whats stopping me is Im a Dahlite, a heatsinker on Dahl. I dont have the money to get an education and I cant get the credits to get an education. A real education, I mean. All they taught me was to read and cipher and use a computer and then I knew enough to be a heatsinker. But I wanted more  So I taught myself."
"In some ways, thats the best kind of teaching. How did you do that?"
"I knew a librarian  She was willing to help me  She was a very nice woman and she showed me how to use computers for learning mathematics. And she set up a software system that would connect me with other libraries. Id come on my days off and on mornings after my shift  Sometimes shed lock me in her private room so I wouldnt be bothered by people coming in or she would let me in when the library was closed. She didnt know mathematics herself, but she helped me all she could  She was oldish, a widow lady. Maybe she thought of me as a kind of son or something. She didnt have children of her own."
(Maybe, thought Seldon briefly, there was some other emotion involved too, but he put the thought away. None of his business.)
"I liked number theory," said Amaryl. "I worked some things out from what I learned from the computer and from the book-films it used to teach me mathematics. I came up with some new things that werent in the book-films." Seldon raised his eyebrows. "Thats interesting. Like what?"
"Ive brought some of them to you. Ive never showed them to anyone. The people around me--" He shrugged. "Theyd either laugh or be annoyed. Once I tried to tell a girl I knew, but she just said I was weird and wouldnt see me anymore  Is it all right for me to show them to you?"
"Quite all right. Believe me "
Seldon held out his hand aaaaafter a brief hesitation, Amaryl handed him the bag he was carrying.
For a long time, Seldon looked over Amaryls papers. The work was naive in the extreme, but he allowed no smile to cross his face  He followed the demonstrations, not one of which was new, of course--or even nearly new--or of any importance.
But that didnt matter.
Seldon looked up. "Did you do all of this yourself?"
Amaryl, looking more than half-frightened, nodded his head. Seldon extracted several sheets. "What made you think of this?" His finger ran down a line of mathematical reasoning.
Amaryl looked it over, frowned, and thought about it  Then he explained his line of thinking.
Seldon listened and said, "Did you ever read a book by Anat Bigell?"
"On number theory?"
"The title was Mathematical Deduction. It wasnt about number theory, particularly."
Amaryl shook his head. "I never heard of him. Im sorry."
"He worked out this theorem of yours three hundred years ago.
Amaryl looked stricken. "I didnt know that."
"Im sure you didnt. You did it more cleverly, though. Its not rigorous, but--"
"What do you mean, rigorous?"
"It doesnt matter." Seldon put the papers back together in a sheaf, restored it to the bag, and said, "Make several copies of all this. Take one copy, have it dated by an official computer, and place it under computerized seal. My friend here, Mistress Venabili, can get you into Streeling University without tuition on some sort of scholarship. Youll have to start at the beginning and take courses in other subjects than mathematics, but--"
By now Amaryl had caught his breath. "Into Streeling University? They wont take me "
"Why not? Dors, you can arrange it, cant you?"
"Im sure I can."
"No, you cant," said Amaryl hotly. "They wont take me  Im from Dahl "
"Well?"
"They wont take people from Dahl "
Seldon looked at Dors. "Whats he talking about?"
Dors shook her head. "I really dont know."
Amaryl said, "Youre an Outworlder, Mistress  How long have you been at Streeling?"
"A little over two years, Mr. Amaryl."
"Have you ever seen Dahlites there--short, curly black hair, big mustaches?"
"There are students with all kinds of appearances."
"But no Dahlites. Look again the next time youre there."
"Why not?" said Seldon.
"They dont like us. We look different. They dont like our mustaches."
"You can shave your--" but Seldons voice died under the others furious glance.
"Never. Why should I? My mustache is my manhood."
"You shave your beard. Thats your manhood too."
"To my people it is the mustache."
Seldon looked at Dors again and murmured, "Bald heads, mustaches ... madness."
"What?" said Amaryl angrily.
"Nothing. Tell me what else they dont like about Dahlites."
"They make up things not to like. They say we smell. They say were dirty. They say we steal. They say were violent. They say were dumb."
"Why do they say all this?"
"Because its easy to say it and it makes them feel good. Sure, if we work in the heatsinks, we get dirty and smelly. If were poor and held down, some of us steal and get violent. But that isnt the way it is with all of us. How about those tall yellow-hairs in the Imperial Sector who think they own the Galaxy--no, they do own the Galaxy. Dont they ever get violent? Dont they steal sometimes? If they did my job, theyd smell the way I do. If they had to live the way I have to, theyd get dirty too."
"Who denies that there are people of all kinds in all places?" said Seldon.
"No one argues the matter! They just take it for granted. Master Seldon, Ive got to get away from Trantor. I have no chance on Trantor, no way of earning credits, no way of getting an education, no way of becoming a mathematician, no way of becoming any thing but what they say I am ... a worthless nothing." This last was said in frustration--and desperation.
Seldon tried to be reasonable. "The person Im renting this room from is a Dahlite. He has a clean job. Hes educated."
"Oh sure," said Amaryl passionately. "There are some. They let a few do it so that they can say it can be done. And those few can live nicely as long as they stay in Dahl. Let them go outside and theyll see how theyre treated. And while theyre in here they make themselves feel good by treating the rest of us like dirt. That makes them yellow-hairs in their own eyes. What did this nice person youre renting this room from say when you told him you were bringing in a heatsinker? What did he say I would be like? Theyre gone now ... wouldnt be in the same place with me."
Seldon moistened his lips. "I wont forget you. Ill see to it that youll get off Trantor and into my own University in Helicon--once Im back there myself."
"Do you promise that? Your word of honor? Even though Im a Dahlite?"
"The fact that youre a Dahlite is unimportant to me. The fact that you are already a mathematician is! But I still cant quite grasp what youre telling me. I find it impossible to believe that there would be such unreasoning feeling against harmless people."
Amaryl said bitterly, "Thats because youve never had any occasion to interest yourself in such things. It can all pass right under your nose and you wouldnt smell a thing because it doesnt affect you. " Dors said, "Mr. Amaryl, Dr. Seldon is a mathematician like you and his head can sometimes be in the clouds. You must understand that. I am a historian, however. I know that it isnt unusual to have one group of people look down upon another group. There are peculiar and almost ritualistic hatreds that have no rational justification and that can have their serious historical influence. Its too bad."
Amaryl said, "Saying something is too bad is easy. You say you disapprove, which makes you a nice person, and then you can go about your own business and not be interested anymore. Its a lot worse than too bad. Its against everything decent and natural. Were all of us the same, yellow-hairs and black-hairs, tall and short, Easterners, Westerners, Southerners, and Outworlders. Were all of us, you and I and even the Emperor, descended from the people of Earth, arent we?"
"Descended from what?" asked Seldon. He turned to look at Dors, his eyes wide.
"From the people of Earth!" shouted Amaryl. "The one planet on which human beings originated."
"One planet? Just one planet?"
"The only planet. Sure. Earth."
"When you say Earth, you mean Aurora, dont you?"
"Aurora? Whats that?--I mean Earth. Have you never heard of Earth?"
"No," said Seldon. "Actually not."
"Its a mythical world," began Dors, "that--"
"Its not mythical. It was a real planet."
Seldon sighed. "Ive heard this all before. Well, lets go through it again. Is there a Dahlite book that tells of Earth?"
"What?"
"Some computer software, then?"
"I dont know what youre talking about."
"Young man, where did you hear about Earth?"
"My dad told me. Everyone knows about it."
"Is there anyone who knows about it especially? Did they teach you about it in school?"
"They never said a word about it there."
"Then how do people know about it?"
Amaryl shrugged his shoulders with an air of being uselessly badgered over nothing. "Everyone just does. If you want stories about it, theres Mother Rittah. I havent heard that shes died yet."
"Your mother? Wouldnt you know--"
"Shes not my mother. Thats just what they call her. Mother Rittah. Shes an old woman. She lives in Billibotton. Or used to."
"Wheres that?"
"Down in that direction," said Amaryl, gesturing vaguely.
"How do I get there?"
"Get there? You dont want to get there. Youd never come back."
"Why not?"
"Believe me. You dont want to go there."
"But Id like to see Mother Rittah."
Amaryl shook his head. "Can you use a knife?"
"For what purpose? What kind of knife?"
"A cutting knife. Like this." Amaryl reached down to the belt that held his pants tight about his waist. A section of it came away and from one end there flashed out a knife blade, thin, gleaming, and deadly. Dorss hand immediately came down hard upon his right wrist. Amaryl laughed. "I wasnt planning to use it. I was just showing it to you." He put the knife back in his belt. "You need one in self-defense and if you dont have one or if you have one but dont know how to use it, youll never get out of Billibotton alive. Anyway"--he suddenly grew very grave and intent--"are you really serious, Master Seldon, about helping me get to Helicon?"
"Entirely serious. Thats a promise. Write down your name and where you can be reached by hypercomputer. You have a code, I suppose."
"My shift in the heatsinks has one. Will that do?"
"Yes."
"Well then," said Amaryl, looking up earnestly at Seldon, "this means I have my whole future riding on you, Master Seldon, so please dont go to Billibotton. I cant afford to lose you now."
He turned beseeching eyes on Dors and said softly, "Mistress Venabili, if hell listen to you, dont let him go. Please."
Billibotton
DAHL-- ... Oddly enough, the best-known aspect of this sector is Billibotton, a semi-legendary place about which innumerable tales have grown up. In fact, a whole branch of literature now exists in which heroes and adventurers (and victims) must dare the dangers of passing through Billibotton. So stylized have these stories become that the one well-known and, presumably, authentic tale involving such a passage, that of Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili, has come to seem fantastic simply by association ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

第六十五章
　　阿马瑞尔于一四○○时之前几分钟抵达，一面走一面谨慎地环顾四周。他的头发相当整洁，浓密的八字胡经过梳理，两端微微向上翘起，身上的短衫白得惊人。他的确有一股味道，不过那是一种水果香味，无疑是由于香水用得有点过度。此外，他随身带了一个袋子。
谢顿早就等在外面。他和铎丝分别拉着阿乌瑞尔的手臂，三人迅速走向升降机。到了正确的楼层之后，他们穿过公寓中其他房间，直奔谢顿的卧房。
阿马瑞尔卑躬地低声说道：“没有人在家，啊？”
“每个人都在忙。”谢顿中肯地说。然后他指了指房间中唯一的椅子，那其实是个直接放在地板上的坐垫。
“不，”阿马瑞尔说，“我不需要那个，你们两人随便哪位用吧。”他以优雅的动作蹲坐到地板上。
铎丝模仿着那个动作，坐到谢顿那个坐垫的旁边。谢顿坐下的姿势十分笨拙，不得不伸手帮忙，而且双腿怎么搁都不对劲。
谢顿说：“好啦，年轻人，你为什么想要见我？”
“因为你是一位数学家，是我见过的第一位数学家——近距离，我甚至能碰到你，你知道我的意思。”
“数学家摸起来跟其他人一样。”
“对我而言可不一样，谢……谢……谢顿博士？”
“那正是我的名字。”
阿马瑞尔看来很高兴：“我终于想起来了。你可知道，谢顿博士，我也想成为一位数学家。”
“很好。是什么阻止了你？”
阿马瑞尔突然皱起眉头：“你真的想知道吗？”
“是的，我很想知道。我猜想一定有什么阻止了你。”
“阻止我的就是我是个达尔人，是个达尔的热闾工。我没钱接受教育，也赚不到足够的信用点受教育——我是指真正的教育。他们教我的只不过是阅读、计算，以及怎样使用计算机，然后我就足以当个热闾工。但是我要学更多的东西，所以我一直在自修。”
“就某方面而言，那是最好的教育方式。你是怎么做的？”
“我认识一名图书馆员，她乐意帮我。她是一位非常好的妇人，教导我如何使用计算机学习数学。她还建了一个软件系统，让我能和其他图书馆联线。我总是在假日以及早晨下工后到那儿去。有时她会把我锁在她私人的房间，这样我就不会被其他人打扰，她也会在图书馆关闭时让我进来。她自己完全不懂数学，但她尽一切力量帮助我。她有些年纪了，是个寡妇。也许她把我当成儿子之类看待，她自己没有子女。”
（也许，谢顿突然想到，这里面还牵涉到其他情感。但他随即将这个想法抛到脑后，这与他毫无关系。）
“我喜欢数论，”阿马瑞尔说，“我根据自己从计算机，以及它用来教我数学的胶卷书中学到的东西，自己做出一些结果。我得到一些新的东西，是那些胶卷书里没有的。”
谢顿扬起眉毛：“那可真有意思，比如说什么？”
“我带来一些，我从未给任何人看过。我周围那些人……”他耸了耸肩，“他们不是大笑就是嫌烦。有一次，我试着告诉一个女孩我知道的东西，但她只是说我莫名其妙，以后再也不要见我。我拿给你看没关系吗？”
“真的没关系，相信我。”
谢顿伸出一只手。短暂的迟疑之后，阿马瑞尔将带来的袋子交给了他。
接下来好长一段时间，谢顿都在翻阅阿马瑞尔的稿件。其中的内容都极其朴素，但他不让脸上掠现任何笑容。他一个一个论证读下去，当然，并没有任何创见，甚至连接近创见的也没有，更找不到任何重要结果。
不过这没有关系。
谢顿抬起头：“这些全是你自己做出来的吗？”
阿马瑞尔看来有七八分吓呆了，只是一个劲地点头。
谢顿抽出几张纸来：“你怎么会想到这点？”他的手指画向一行数学推论。
阿马瑞尔仔细看了看，皱起眉头来，又想了一想。然后，他开始解释自己的思路。
谢顿听完之后说：“你曾经读过艾南•比格尔写的一本书吗？”
“有关数沦的吗？”
“书名叫做《数学演绎法》，不是专讲数论的。”
阿码瑞尔摇了摇头：“我从来没听过这个人，我很抱歉。”
“三百年以前，他就推出了你这个定理。”
阿马瑞尔似乎受到当头棒喝：“我不知道这件事。”
“我相信你不知道，不过你的做法比较高明。虽然并不严密，可是……”
“你所谓‘严密’是什么意思？”
“这没有关系。”谢顿将稿件重新扎成一束，放回那个袋子里。“把这些全部复印几份，找个官方计算机将其中一份打上日期，并且加上计算机化封印。我的这位朋友，凡纳比里夫人，能帮你申请到某种奖学金，让你免费进入川陀大学就读。你必须一切从头开始，还要修习数学以外的其他课程，但是……”
不料阿马瑞尔突然倒抽一口气：“进川陀大学？他们不会收我。”
“为什么不会？铎丝，你能帮他安排，对不对？”
“我确定可以。”
“不，你办不到。”阿马瑞尔激动地说，“他们不会收我，我是个达尔人。”
“那又怎么样？”
“他们不会收达尔的同胞。”
谢顿望向铎丝：“他在说些什么？”
铎丝摇了摇头：“我真的不知道。”
阿马瑞尔说：“你是一位外星人士，夫人？你在川陀大学待了多久了？”
“两年多一点．阿马瑞尔先生。”
“你曾经在那里见到过达尔人吗——矮个子、黑色卷发、粗大的八字胡？”
“那里各式各样外形的学生都有。”
“可是没有达尔人，你下次再仃细看一看。”
“为什么没有？”谢顿问道。
“他们不喜欢我们，我们看来不一样，他们不喜欢我们的八字胡。”
“你可以剃掉你的……”在对方激愤的瞪视下，谢顿的声音陡然中断。
“绝不，我为什么要那样做？八字胡是我的男性象征。”
“你剃掉了下面的胡须，那也是你的男性象征。”
“对我的同胞而言八字胡才是。”
谢顿再度望向铎丝，喃喃说道：“光头，八字胡……愚昧……”
“什么？”阿马瑞尔气呼呼地说。
“没什么。告诉我，达尔人还有哪些地方是他们不喜欢的。”
“他们捏造出许多不喜欢的事。他们说我们有臭味，他们说我们肮脏，他们说我们偷窃，他们说我们暴戾，说我们愚蠢。”
“他们为何要这样说？”
“因为说说很容易，而且会让他们感到舒服。如果我们存热闾里工作，我们当然会变脏变臭。如果我们贫穷又不得翻身，有些人就会行窃，并且染上暴戾之气，不过我们大家并非都是那样。那些居住在皇区，认为他们拥有整个银河——不，的确拥有整个银河的黄发高个子又怎么样？他们绝不会有暴戾之气吗？他们从来不偷窃吗？如果让他们做我的工作，他们会和我一样发出臭味；如果他们必须过着像我一样的生活，他们也会变得肮脏。”
“谁能否认各处住有各种不同的人？”谢顿说。
“没人议论这一点！他们只是视为理所当然。谢顿老爷，我一定得离开川陀。我在川陀没有任何机会，无法嫌到信用点，无法接受教育，无法成为一位数学家，无法成为任何人物，只能是他们所谓的……一个没用的废物。”最后半句是在挫折与绝望中说出来的。
谢顿试图跟他说理：“租给我这个房间的就是个达尔人，他有个干净的工作，而且受过教育。”
“噢，当然啦。”阿马瑞尔以情绪化的口吻说，“是有些这种人。他们让少数人那样，这样他们就能说那是办得到的。那些少数人只要不出达尔，他们就能活得很好。要是让他们到外面去，他们就会晓得将受到何等待遇。当他们待在这里的时候，他们把我们其他人视同粪土，这样他们就会觉得舒服。因此在他们自己眼中，他们就成了黄发阶级。租给你这个房间的好好先生，当你告诉他你要带一个热闾工进来时，他究竟说了些什么？他说我像个什么？他们现在都走了……不愿意和我待在同一个地方。”
谢顿舔了舔嘴唇：“我不会忘记你。我保证会让你离开川陀，进入赫利肯我的那所大学——一旦我自己回到那里之后。”
“你答应这件事吗？你以名誉担保？虽然我是个达尔人？”
“你是达尔人的事实对我并不重要，重要的是你已经是一位数学家！但是你告诉我的这些事情，我仍然无法完全理解。对于无害的族群竞有如此非理性的情绪，我觉得实在难以置信。”
阿马瑞尔以挖苦的口气说：“那是因为你从来没有任何机会，让自己对这种事发生兴趣。它可以从你的鼻端大摇大摆通过，你却什么也闻不到，因为它对你毫无影响。”
铎丝说：“阿马瑞尔先生，谢顿博士和你一样是数学家，他的脑袋有时会在九霄云外，你必须了解这点。然而，我是一位历史学家。一群人瞧不起另一群人，我知道它并非不寻常的事。有些特殊的、几乎是仪式化的仇恨，根本没有任何理性依据，而且会产生严重的历史影响。这实在太糟了。”
阿马瑞尔说：“‘太糟了’这句话嘴巴说说倒很容易。你说你不敢苟同，这样你就能成为一个好人，然后你就可以管你自己的事，再也不用关心这个问题。这要比‘太糟了’还要糟许多倍，它抵触了所有高尚、自然的事物。我们大家都一样，不论是黄发或黑发，高或矮，东方人、西方人、南方人或外星人士。我们都是一家人，你、我，甚至皇上，全部是地球人的后裔，不是吗？”
“什么的后裔？”谢顿问道。他转身望向铎丝，眼睛睁得老大。
“地球人的后裔！”阿马瑞尔喊道，“人类发源的那颗行星。”
“一颗行星？只有一颗行星？”
“唯一的行星，这还用说，就是地球。”
“你所谓的地球，指的是奥罗拉，对不对？”
“奥罗拉？那是什么？我指的就是地球。你从来没听说过地球吗？”
谢顿说：“其实不能算有。”
“它是个神话世界……”铎丝说到一半便被打断。
“那不是神活，它是一颗真实的行星。”
谢顿叹了一口气：“我以前也听过这一套。好吧，让我们从头再来一遍。达尔是不是有一本书，里面提到了地球？”
“什么？”
“那么，某种计算机软件？”
“我不知道你到底任说些什么。”
“年轻人，你是从哪里听说地球的？”
“我爸爸告诉我的，每个人都知道它。”
“有没有什么人对它特别了解？他们在学校里教过你这些吗？”
“那里根本不提这种事。”
“那么人们是怎么知道的？”
阿马瑞尔耸了耸肩，仿佛听列一个无中生有的烦人问题。“就是每个人都知道。如果你想听这方面的故事，可以去找瑞塔嬷嬷，我还没听说她去世了。”
“你妈妈？你怎么会不知道……”
“她不是我妈妈，只是他们都这样叫她，瑞塔嬷嬷。她是个老妇人，住在脐眼，至少以前住在那里。’’“那地方在哪里？”
“朝那个方向一直走。”阿马瑞尔一面说，一面做了一个含糊的手势。
“我如何到那里去？”
“到那里去？你不该想到那里去，否则你将有去无回。”
“为什么？”
“相信我，你不该想到那里去。”
“可是我希望见见瑞塔嬷嬷。”
阿马瑞尔摇了摇头：“你会用刀吗？”
“做什么用途？什么样的刀？”
“切东西的刀，像这一把。”阿马瑞尔伸手向下，碰了碰紧紧系在腰际的皮带。皮带的一节随即脱落，其中一端闪出一把利刃，它又薄又亮，显然足以致命。
铎丝的于立刻抓住他的右腕。
阿马瑞尔笑了几声：“我不是打算用它，只是亮出来给你们看看。”他将刀子再插回皮带内，“你需要一把刀用来自卫，如果你没有，或者虽有却不知如何使用，你就再也无法活着离开脐眼。总之……”他忽然变得非常严肃专注．“你说要帮助我离开川陀，是认真的吗，谢顿老爷？”
“百分之百认真，那是我的承诺。写下你的名字。还有如何能用超波计算机联络到你。你有址码吧，我想。”
“在我热闾的岗位上有一个，可以吗？”
“可以。”
“好啦，”阿马瑞尔一面说，一面抬起头一本正经地望着谢顿，“这就代表我的未来全部寄托在你身上，谢顿老爷，所以拜托你别去脐眼。如果现在失去你，我无法承担这种损失。”他将恳求的目光转向铎丝，轻声说道：“凡纳比里夫人，如果他肯听你的，就不要让他去，拜托。”
Chapter 66

When Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili were alone, Dors asked thoughtfully, "Are you really planning to see this Mother woman?"
"Im thinking about it, Dors."
"Youre an odd one, Hari. You seem to go steadily from bad to worse. You went Upperside, which seemed harmless enough, for a rational purpose when you were in Streeling. Then, in Mycogen, you broke into the Elders aerie, a much more dangerous task, for a much more foolish purpose. And now in Dahl, you want to go to this place, which that young man seems to think is simple suicide, for something altogether nonsensical."
"Im curious about this reference to Earth--and must know if theres anything to it."
Dors said, "Its a legend and not even an interesting one. It is routine. The names differ from planet to planet, but the content is the same. There is always the tale of an original world and a golden age. There is a longing for a supposedly simple and virtuous past that is almost universal among the people of a complex and vicious society. In one way or another, this is true of all societies, since everyone imagines his or her own society to be too complex and vicious, however simple it may be. Mark that down for your psychohistory."
"Just the same," said Seldon, "I have to consider the possibility that one world did once exist. Aurora ... Earth ... the name doesnt matter. In fact--"
He paused and finally Dors said, "Well?"
Seldon shook his head. "Do you remember the hand-on-thigh story you told me in Mycogen? It was right after I got the Book from Raindrop Forty-Three ... Well, it popped into my head one evening recently when we were talking to the Tisalvers. I said something that reminded me, for an instant--"
"Reminded you of what?"
"I dont remember. It came into my head and went out again, but somehow every time I think of the single-world notion, it seems to me I have the tips of my fingers on something and then lose it."
Dors looked at Seldon in surprise. "I dont see what it could be. The hand-on-thigh story has nothing to do with Earth or Aurora."
"I know, but this ... thing ... that hovers just past the edge of my mind seems to be connected with this single world anyway and I have the feeling that I must find out more about it at any cost. That ... and robots."
"Robots too? I thought the Elders aerie put an end to that."
"Not at all. Ive been thinking about them." He stared at Dors with a troubled look on his face for a long moment, then said, "But Im not sure."
"Sure about what, Hari?"
But Seldon merely shook his head and said nothing more.
Dors frowned, then said, "Hari, let me tell you one thing. In sober history--and, believe me, I know what Im talking about there is no mention of one world of origin. Its a popular belief, I admit. I dont mean just among the unsophisticated followers of folklore, like the Mycogenians and the Dahlite heatsinkers, but there are biologists who insist that there must have been one world of origin for reasons that are well outside my area of expertise and there are the more mystical historians who tend to speculate about it. And among the leisure-class intellectuals, I understand such speculations are becoming fashionable. Still, scholarly history knows nothing about it."
Seldon said, "All the more reason, perhaps, to go beyond scholarly history. All I want is a device that will simplify psychohistory for me and I dont care what the device is, whether it is a mathematical trick or a historical trick or something totally imaginary. If the young man weve just talked to had had a little more formal training, Id have set him on the problem. His thinking is marked by considerable ingenuity and originality--"
Dors said, "And youre really going to help him, then?"
"Absolutely. Just as soon as Im in a position to."
"But ought you to make promises youre not sure youll be able to keep?"
"I want to keep it. If youre that stiff about impossible promises, consider that Hummin told Sunmaster Fourteen that Id use psychohistory to get the Mycogenians their world back. Theres just about zero chance of that. Even if I work out psychohistory, who knows if it can be used for so narrow and specialized a purpose? Theres a real case of promising what one cant deliver."
But Dors said with some heat, "Chetter Hummin was trying to save our lives, to keep us out of the hands of Demerzel and the Emperor. Dont forget that. And I think he really would like to help the Mycogenians."
"And I really would like to help Yugo Amaryl and I am far more likely to be able to help him than I am the Mycogenians, so if you justify the second, please dont criticize the first. Whats more, Dors"--and his eyes flashed angrily--"I really would like to find Mother Rittah and Im prepared to go alone.""Never!" snapped Dors. "If you go, I go."
第六十六章
第十四部 脐眼
达尔：……奇怪得很，本区最出名的一点竟是脐眼，一个半传奇性的地方，无数的传说都以它为中心。事实上，如今存在一个完整的文学派别。其中的主角与冒险家（或牺牲者）必须挑战穿越脐眼的危险。
这些故事已经变得太形式化。因此有一个流传甚广，而且想必真实的传说。是关于哈里•谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里的一次历险，仅仅由于背景为该地，因此看来近乎传奇……
——《银河百科全书》


第六十六章
当哈里•谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里再度独处时，铎丝语重心长地问道：“你真打算去见那个叫‘嬷嬷’的女人？”
“我是有这个打算。”
“你是个怪人，哈里，你似乎每况愈下。当初在斯璀璘，你为一个合理的目的到穹顶上去，那样做好像没什么害处。后来在麦曲生，你闯进长老阁，那是件危险许多的行动，为的却是个愚蠢许多的目的。而如今在达尔．你又想去那个地方，那年轻人似乎认为这样做无异自杀，而这回的目的根本毫无意义。”
“我对他提到的地球感到好奇。如果它有任何蹊跷，我一定要弄清楚。”
铎丝说：“它只是个传奇，甚至不算是有趣的一个。那只是老生常谈，每颗行星上的使用名称都不同，不过内容完全一样。有关起源世界和黄金时代的传说始终不曾消失；处于复杂而邪恶的社会中，人们几乎都渴望一个想必简单且良善的过去。就某个角度而言，所有的社会都是这样，因为每个人都习惯地把自己的社会想象得太复杂、太邪恶，而不管它实际上有多单纯。把这点记下来，放进你的心理史学中。”
“即使如此，”谢顿说，“我仍须考虑某个世界的确曾经存在的可能性。奥罗拉……地球……名称并不重要。其实……”
他顿了许久，最后铎丝终于不得不问：“怎么样？”
谢顿摇了摇头：“你记不记得在麦曲生的时候，你对我说的那个毛手毛脚的故事？当时我刚从雨点四三那里拿到那本典籍……嗯，前两天傍晚，当我们和堤沙佛一家聊天时，它又突然出现在我的脑海。有那么一瞬间，我说的什么事提醒了我自己……”
“提醒你什么？”
“我记不得，它钻进我的脑袋，马上又溜了出去。可是不知怎么搞的，每当我想到那个单一世界的观念，我就觉得好像摸到什么东西，然后又给它溜掉了。”
铎丝惊讶地望着谢顿：“我看不出那会是什么，毛手毛脚的故事和地球或奥罗拉并无任何关联。”
“我知道，可是这件……事情……这件在我心灵边缘徘徊的事情，似乎就是和这个单一世界有关。而且我有一种感觉，我必须不惜任何代价．找出更多和它有关的资料。这点……以及机器人。”
“还有机器人？我以为长老阁的事已经为它画上句点。”
“根本没有，我还一直想到它们。”他带着困惑的表情，凝视了铎丝许久，又说：“可是我并不确定。”
“确定什么，哈里？”
不过谢顿只是摇着头，没有再说什么。
铎丝皱了皱眉头，然后说：“哈里，让我告诉你一件事。在严肃的史学中——相信我，我知道自己在说什么——根本没提到过起源世界。它是一个广为流传的信仰，这点我承认。我指的不只是民间传说的天真信徒，例如麦曲生人和达尔的热闾工；有许多生物学家，也都坚称必定有个起源世界，根据的理由远远超出我的专业领域。此外还有些倾向神秘主义的历史学家，也喜欢对它做些臆测。而在有闲阶级的知识分子之间，我了解这种臆测已逐渐变成时尚。然而，学院派的史学对它仍旧一无所知。”
谢顿说：“既然这样，或许我们更有理由超越学院派史学。我要的只是个能为我简化心理史学的机制，我不在乎是什么机制，无论是数学技巧、历史技巧，或是什么全然虚无的东西都好。如果刚刚和我们晤谈的那个年轻人，曾多受过一点正规训练，我会把这个问题交给他。他的思考具有可观的巧思和原创性……”
铎丝说：“这么说，你真准备帮助他？”
“正是如此，一旦我有这个能力之后。”
“可是你该承诺吗？你根本不知道这事是否能兑现。”
“我是想兑现。如果你对不可能的承诺那么斤斤计较，想想夫铭是怎么对日主十四说的。他说我会用心理史学帮麦曲生人带回他们的世界，这件事成功的机会根本等于零。即使我真的完成心理史学，谁晓得能不能用在如此狭窄而特定的目的上？要说无法兑现的承诺，这是个现成的实例。”
不料铎丝带着一点火气说：“别忘了，哈里，契特•夫铭当时是试图救我们的命，让我们不至落入丹莫茨尔和皇上手中。而且我认为，他是真的希望帮助那些麦曲生人。”
“而我也真的希望帮助雨果•阿马瑞尔。比起那些麦曲生人，我能帮助他的可能性要大得多，所以如果你认可前者，就请不要再批评后者。除此之外，铎丝，”他的双眼闪出怒火，“我真的希望找到瑞塔嬷嬷，我准备独自前往。”
“绝不！”铎丝断然说道，“如果你去，那我也去。”
Chapter 67

Mistress Tisalver returned with her daughter in tow an hour after Amaryl had left on this way to his shift. She said nothing at all to either Seldon or Dors, but gave a curt nod of her head when they greeted her and gazed sharply about the room as though to verify that the heatsinker had left no trace. She then sniffed the air sharply and looked at Seldon accusingly before marching through the common room into the family bedroom.
Tisalver himself arrived home later and when Seldon and Dors came to the dinner table, Tisalver took advantage of the fact that his wife was still ordering some last-minute details in connection with the dinner to say in a low voice, "Has that person been here?"
"And gone," said Seldon solemnly. "Your wife was out at the time."
Tisalver nodded and said, "Will you have to do this again?"
"I dont think so," said Seldon.
"Good."
Dinner passed largely in silence, but afterward, when the daughter had gone to her room for the dubious pleasures of computer practice, Seldon leaned back and said, "Tell me about Billibotton."
Tisalver looked astonished and his mouth moved without any sound issuing.
Casilia, however, was less easily rendered speechless. She said, "Is that where your new friend lives? Are you going to return the visit?"
"So far," said Seldon quietly, "I have just asked about Billibotton."
Casilia said sharply, "It is a slum. The dregs live there. No one goes there, except the filth that make their homes there."
"I understand a Mother Rittah lives there."
"I never heard of her," said Casilia, her mouth closing with a snap. It was quite clear that she had no intention of knowing anyone by name who lived in Billibotton.
Tisalver, casting an uneasy look at his wife, said, "Ive heard of her. Shes a crazy old woman who is supposed to tell fortunes."
"And does she live in Billibotton?"
"I dont know, Master Seldon. Ive never seen her. Shes mentioned sometimes in the news holocasts when she makes her predictions."
"Do they come true?"
Tisalver snorted. "Do predictions ever come true? Hers dont even make sense."
"Does she ever talk about Earth?"
"I dont know. I wouldnt be surprised."
"The mention of Earth doesnt puzzle you. Do you know about Earth?"
Now Tisalver looked surprised. "Certainly, Master Seldon. Its the world all people came from ... supposedly."
"Supposedly? Dont you believe it?"
"Me? Im educated. But many ignorant people believe it."
"Are there book-films about Earth?"
"Childrens stories sometimes mention Earth. I remember, when I was a young boy, my favorite story began, Once, long ago, on Earth, when Earth was the only planet-- Remember, Casilia? You liked it too."
Casilia shrugged, unwilling to bend as yet.
"Id like to see it sometime," said Seldon, "but I mean real book-films ... uh ... learned ones ... or films ... or printouts."
"I never heard of any, but the library--"
"Ill try that.--Are there any taboos about speaking of Earth?"
"What are taboos?"
"I mean, is it a strong custom that people mustnt talk of Earth or that outsiders mustnt ask about it?"
Tisalver looked so honestly astonished that there seemed no point in waiting for an answer.
Dors put in, "Is there some rule about outsiders not going to Billibotton?"
Now Tisalver turned earnest. "No rule, but its not a good idea for anyone to go there. I wouldnt."
Dors said, "Why not?"
"Its dangerous. Violent! Everyone is armed.--I mean, Dahl is an armed place anyway, but in Billibotton they use the weapons. Stay in this neighborhood. Its safe."
"So far," said Casilia darkly. "It would be better if we left altogether. Heatsinkers go anywhere these days." And there was another lowering look in Seldons direction.
Seldon said, "What do you mean that Dahl is an armed place? There are strong Imperial regulations against weapons."
"I know that," said Tisalver, "and there are no stun guns here or percussives or Psychic Probes or anything like that. But there are knives." He looked embarrassed.
Dors said, "Do you carry a knife, Tisalver?"
"Me?" He looked genuinely horrified. "I am a man of peace and this is a safe neighborhood."
"We have a couple of them in the house," said Casilia, sniffing again. "Were not that certain this is a safe neighborhood."
"Does everyone carry knives?" asked Dors.
"Almost everyone, Mistress Venabili," said Tisalver. "Its customary. But that doesnt mean everyone uses them."
"But they use them in Billibotton, I suppose," said Dors.
"Sometimes. When theyre excited, they have fights."
"And the government permits it? The Imperial government, I mean?"
"Sometimes they try to clean Billibotton up, but knives are too easy to hide and the custom is too strong. Besides, its almost always Dahlites that get killed and I dont think the Imperial government gets too upset over that."
"What if its an outsider who gets killed?"
"If its reported, the Imperials could get excited. But what happens is that no one has seen anything and no one knows anything. The Imperials sometimes round up people on general principles, but they can never prove anything. I suppose they decide its the outsiders fault for being there.--So dont go to Billibotton, even if you have a knife."
Seldon shook his head rather pettishly. "I wouldnt carry a knife. I dont know how to use one. Not skillfully."
"Then its simple, Master Seldon. Stay out." Tisalver shook his head portentously. "Just stay out."
"I may not be able to do that either," said Seldon.
Dors glared at him, clearly annoyed, and said to Tisalver, "Where does one buy a knife? Or may we have one of yours?"
Casilia said quickly, "No one takes someone elses knife. You must buy your own."
Tisalver said, "There are knife stores all over. There arent supposed to be. Theoretically theyre illegal, you know. Any appliance store sells them, however. If you see a washing machine on display, thats a sure sign."
"And how does one get to Billibotton?" asked Seldon.
"By Expressway."
Tisalver looked dubious as he looked at Dorss frowning expression.
Seldon said, "And once I reach the Expressway?"
"Get on the eastbound side and watch for the signs. But if you must go, Master Seldon"--Tisalver hesitated, then said--"you mustnt take Mistress Venabili. Women sometimes are treated ... worse."
"She wont go," said Seldon.
"Im afraid she will," said Dors with quiet determination.

第六十七章
　　阿马瑞尔离开一小时之后，堤沙佛夫人牵着她的女儿一块回来。她没对谢顿或铎丝说半句话，只是在他们跟她打招呼时随便点了点头，并以锐利的目光扫视整个房间，仿佛要确定那热闾工未曾留下任何痕迹。接着她猛力吸了几口气，又以必师问罪的眼光望向谢顿，这于穿过起居室走到主卧房。
堤沙佛自己较晚回家。当谢顿与铎丝来到餐桌旁，堤沙佛趁着妻子还在张罗晚餐最后的细节，压低声音说：“那人来过了吗？”
“来过又走了，”谢顿严肃地说，“你太太当时也不在。”
堤沙佛点了点头，又说：“你还需要请他来吗？”
“我想不会了。”谢顿答道。
“很好。”
晚餐几乎在沉默中进行。但在晚餐过后，当小女孩回到她的房间去练习趣味性可疑的计算机时，谢顿将身子往后一靠，说：“告诉我有关脐眼的种种。”
堤沙佛看来吃了一惊，蠕动的嘴唇并未发出任何声音。然而，卡西莉娅却没那么容易目瞪口呆。
她说：“你的新朋友住在那里吗？你准备要去回拜？”
“目前为止，”谢顿平静地说，“我只是提到脐眼而已。”
卡西莉娅尖声说道：“它是个贫民窟，住在那里的都是渣滓。没有人到那里去，只有秽物才把那里当自己的家。”
“我知道有位瑞塔嬷嬷住在那儿。”
“我从没听说过这个人。”卡西莉娅说完猛地闭上嘴巴。她的意思相当明显，她根本不打算知道任何住在脐眼的人叫什么名字。
堤沙佛一面不安地望着他的妻子，一面说道：“我曾听说过她，她是个疯癫的老妇人，据说靠算命为生。”
“她住在脐眼吗？”
“我不知道，谢顿老爷，我从未见过她。她偶尔做出预言的时候，全息电视新闻便会提到。”
“它们成真了吗？”
堤沙佛嗤之以鼻：“哪个预言最后成真了？她的预言甚至毫无意义。”
“她曾经提到过地球吗？”
“我不知道，即使有我也不会惊讶。”
“提起地球没让你摸不着头脑，你知道有关地球旧事吗？”
此时，堤沙佛才显出惊讶的表情：“当然啦，谢顿老爷。所有的人类都来自那个世界……据说如此。”
“据说如此？你不相信吗？”
“我？我受过教育，但许多无知的民众都相信。”
“有没有关于地球的胶卷书？”
“儿童故事有时会提到地球。我记得当我还是个小男孩的时候，我最喜欢的故事是这样开头的：‘很久以前，当地球还是唯一行星的时候……’记得吗，卡西莉娅？你也喜欢这个故事。”
卡西莉娅耸了耸肩，不愿就此软化。
“我希望改天能看一看，”谢顿说，“但我指的是真正的胶卷书……呃……教学用的……或是影片……或是列印表。”
“我从未听说有这些东西，不过图书馆……”
“我会去那里试试看——有没有任何禁忌不准提到地球？”
“禁忌是什么？”
“我的意思是，有没有一个强烈的习俗，不准民众提到地球，或是不准外人问起？”
堤沙佛的惊讶看来如此货真价实，似乎毫无必要等待他的回答。
铎丝插嘴道：“有没有什么规定，不准外人前往脐眼？”
这时堤沙佛变得一本正经：“没有什么规定，但任何人到那坐去都是不智之举，我就不会去。”
铎丝说：“为什么？”
“它充满危险，充满暴力！每个人都带着武器——我的意思是说，虽然达尔是个武装地区，可是在脐眼他们真的使用武器。留在这里吧，这里才安全。”
“目前是如此。”卡西莉娅以阴郁的口吻说，“总之，我们最好离开这个地方，这年头热闾工无处不在。”说完，她又朝谢顿的方向白了一眼。
谢帧说：“你说达尔是个武装地区是什么意思？帝国政府有管制武器的强硬规定。”
“我知道，”堤沙佛说，“这里没有麻痹枪或震波武器，也没有心灵探测器或任何类似的东西，可是我们有刀。”他看来有些尴尬。
铎丝说：“你随身带着刀吗，堤沙佛？”
“我？”他现厌恶至极的表情，“我是个爱好和平的人，而且这里是个安全的小区。”
“我们家里藏了几把，”卡西莉娅一面说，一面又哼了一声。“我们并不那么确定这是个安全的小区。”
“是不是每个人都随身带着刀？”铎丝问道。
“几乎人人都带，凡纳比里夫人。”堤沙佛说，“这是一种习俗，但不代表每个人都用得到。”
“脐眼的人却用得到，我这么想。”铎丝说。
“有些时候。他们一激动就会打起来。”
“政府准许这种事吗？我是指帝国政府？”
“他们有时也会试图将脐眼扫荡干净，呵是刀子太容易藏匿，而且这种风气又很难扭转。此外，被杀害的几乎总是达尔人，我想帝国政府不会为此太过烦心。”
“万一被杀的是个外地人呢？”
“如果有人报案，是有可能惊动到帝国官员。不过实际上，绝不会有人看到或知道任何事。帝国官员有时会根据普通法令逮捕民众，但他们向来无法证明任何事。我想他们总是认定，外地人到那里去是自己的错。所以不要前往脐眼，即使你有一把刀。”
谢顿烦躁地摇摇头：“我不会带刀去，我根本不知道如何使用。”
“那还不简单，谢顿老爷，不要进去。”堤沙佛忧心忡忡地摇了摇头，“总之不要进去。”
“或许我也无法做到这点。”谢顿说。
铎丝瞪着他，显然是不耐烦了，然后她对堤沙佛说：“哪里才能买到刀子？或是我们能借用你们的吗？”
卡西莉娅立刻应道：“没有人借用别人的刀子，你必须自己去买。”
堤沙佛说：“卖刀的店里到处都有——其实不该这样，理论上它们是不合法的，你知道吧。然而，任何用品店里都有出售。如果你看到店面展示着一台洗衣机，那就准设错。”
“还有，怎样到脐眼去？”谢顿问道。
“搭乘磁浮捷运。”堤沙佛无奈地望向铎丝，铎丝正皱起了眉头。
谢顿又接着问：“抵达磁浮捷运站之后呢？”
“搭上向东的列车，注意沿途的路标。不过假使你非去不可，谢顿老爷，”堤沙佛迟疑了一下，又说，“你一定不能带凡纳比里夫人。妇女有时会遭到……更糟的下场。”
“她不会去。”谢顿说。
“只怕她会去。”铎丝的回答斩钉截铁。

Chapter 68

The appliance store dealers mustache was clearly as lush as it had been in his younger days, but it was grizzled now, even though the hair on his head was still black. He touched the mustache out of sheer habit as he gazed at Dors and brushed it back on each side.
He said, "Youre not a Dahlite."
"Yes, but I still want a knife."
He said, "Its against the law to sell knives."
Dors said, "Im not a policewoman or a government agent of any sort. Im going to Billibotton."
He stared at her thoughtfully. "Alone?"
"With my friend." She jerked her thumb over her shoulder in the direction of Seldon, who was waiting outside sullenly.
"Youre buying it for him?" He stared at Seldon and it didnt take him long to decide. "Hes an outsider too. Let him come in and buy it for himself."
"Hes not a government agent either. And Im buying it for myself."
The dealer shook his head. "Outsiders are crazy. But if you want to spend some credits, Ill take them from you."
He reached under the counter, brought out a stub, turned it with a slight and expert motion, and the knife blade emerged.
"Is that the largest you have?"
"Best womans knife made."
"Show me a mans knife."
"You dont want one thats too heavy. Do you know how to use one of these things?"
"Ill learn and Im not worried about heavy. Show me a mans knife."
The dealer smiled. "Well, if you want to see one--"
He moved farther down the counter and brought up a much fatter stub. He gave it a twist and what appeared to be a butchers knife emerged. He handed it to her, handle first, still smiling.
She said, "Show me that twist of yours."
He showed her on a second knife, slowly twisting one way to make the blade appear, then the other way to make it disappear. "Twist and squeeze," he said.
"Do it again, sir."
The dealer obliged.
Dors said, "All right, close it and toss me the haft."
He did, in a slow upward loop.
She caught it, handed it back, and said, "Faster."
He raised his eyebrows and then, without warning, backhanded it to her left side. She made no attempt to bring over her right hand, but caught it with her left and the blade showed tumescently at once--then disappeared. The dealers mouth fell open.
"And this is the largest you have?" she said.
"It is. If you try to use it, it will just tire you out."
"Ill breathe deeply. Ill take a second one too."
"For your friend?"
"No. For me."
"You plan on using two knives?"
"Ive got two hands."
The dealer sighed. "Mistress, please stay out of Billibotton. You dont know what they do to women there."
"I can guess. How do I put these knives on my belt?"
"Not the one youve got on, Mistress. Thats not a knife belt. I can sell you one, though."
"Will it hold two knives?"
"I might have a double belt somewhere. Not much call for them."
"Im calling for them."
"I may not have it in your size."
"Then well cut it down or something."
"It will cost you a lot of credits."
"My credit tile will cover it."
When she emerged at last, Seldon said sourly, "You look ridiculous with that bulky belt."
"Really, Hari? Too ridiculous to go with you to Billibotton? Then lets both go back to the apartment."
"No. Ill go on by myself. Ill be safer by myself."
Dors said, "There is no use saying that, Hari. We both go back or we both go forward. Under no circumstances do we separate."
And somehow the firm look in her blue eyes, the set to her lips, and the manner in which her hands had dropped to the hafts at her belt, convinced Seldon she was serious.
"Very well," he said, "but if you survive and if I ever see Hummin again, my price for continuing to work on psychohistory--much as I have grown fond of you--will be your removal. Do you understand?"
And suddenly Dors smiled. "Forget it. Dont practice your chivalry on me. Nothing will remove me. Do you understand?"
第六十八章
　　用品店老板的八字胡显然与年轻时一样浓密，只是颜色已变斑白，不过他的头发乌黑依旧。他一面凝视着铎丝，一面抚摸着两撇胡子，并将它朝两侧往后梳，这全然是一种习惯性动作。
他说：“你不是达尔人。”
“没错，但我仍还要一把刀。”
他说：“卖刀是违法的。”
铎丝说：“我小是女警，也不是什么政府特务。我要到脐眼去。”
他意味深长地瞪着她：“一个人？”
“和我的朋友一起。”她将拇指朝肩后一甩，指向谢顿所在的位置，后者正绷着脸等在外面。
“你是要帮他买？”他瞪了谢顿一下，很快就做出判断。“他也是个外地人，让他进来自己买。”
“他也不是政府特务，另外，我买刀是给自己用。”
老板摇了摇头：“外地人都很疯狂。但如果你想花掉些信用点，我倒是乐意帮你的忙。”他伸手从柜台下面掏出一根粗短的圆棒，再以行家的动作轻轻一转，刀锋立刻冒出。
“这是你这里最大的一种吗？”
“最好的女用刀。”
“拿一把男用的给我看看。”
“你不会想要一把太重的。你知道如何使用这种家伙吗？”
“我可以学，而且我不担心重量。拿一把男用的给我看看。”
老板微微一笑：“好吧，既然你想要看——”他伸手探向柜台的更下层，拿出一根粗得多的圆棒，随手一扭，一把看来像屠夫用的利刃便出现了。
他将刀柄朝前交给她，脸上仍旧带着微笑。
她说：“让我看看你是怎么扭的。”
他掏出另一把为她示范，先慢慢扭向一侧，刀锋立时闪现，再扭向另一侧，刀锋随即收进。“一面扭一面压。”他说。
“再做一遍，阁下。”
老板遵命照办。
钎丝说：“好啦，收起来，将刀柄丢给我。”
他依言照做，刀子缓缓画出一个上抛弧线。
她接住后又还回去，说：“快一点。”
老板扬起眉毛，然后在毫无预警的情况下，反手将刀丢向她的左侧。她并未试图将右手伸过去，反而直接用左手将它接住。刀锋立刻冒出头来，下一刻又随即消失，老板看得目瞪口呆。
“这是你这里最大的一种？”她说。
“是的。如果你试图用这把刀，一定会令你筋疲力尽。”
“我会做深呼吸。我还要另外一把。”
“给你的朋友？”
“不，给我自己。”
“你打算用两把刀？”
“我有两只手。”
老板叹了一声：“夫人，奉劝你离脐眼远一点。你不知道他们那里怎样对付女人。”
“我能猜到。我如何将这两把刀插进皮带里？”
“你身上那条皮带不行，夫人，那不是刀带。不过，我可以卖给你一条。”
“它能装两把刀吗？”
“我应该有一条双刀带放在哪里，它们的需求量不大。”
“你现在就有一个买主。”
“我也许没有符合你的尺寸。”
“那么我们可以把它切短，或是想别的办法，”
“你得花上许多信用点。”
“我的信用磁卡付得起。”
当她终于走出来时，谢顿口气有点尖酸地说：“你系着这条笨重的皮带看来真滑稽。”
“真的吗，哈里？是不是太滑稽了，不配跟你到脐眼去？那就让我们一同回公寓吧。”
“不，我要单独去，我自己去会比较安全。”
铎丝说：“这样说一点用也没有，哈里。我们一起向后转，否则就一起向前走。不论在任何情况下，我们都不会分开。”
此时，她监眼珠所透出的坚决眼神，她嘴角弯成的弧度，以及她双手放在腰际刀柄上的姿势，使谢顿终于相信她是认真的。
“很好，”他说，“但如果你活着回来，如果我还能见到夫铭，那么，我继续研究心理史学的代价就是让你离去——虽然我越来越喜欢你。你能了解吗？”
铎丝突然露出微笑：“忘掉这件事吧，别在我身上展现你的骑士精神。无论如何我都不会离去，你能了解吗？”
Chapter 69
They got off the Expressway where the sign, flickering in the air, said: BILLIBOTTON. As perhaps an indication of what might be expected, the second I was smeared, a mere blob of fainter light.
They made their way out of the car and down to the walkway below. It was early afternoon and at first glance, Billibotton seemed much like the part of Dahl they had left.
The air, however, had a pungent aroma and the walkway was littered with trash.
One could tell that auto-sweeps were not to be found in the neighborhood. And, although the walkway looked ordinary enough, the atmosphere was uncomfortable and as tense as a too-tightly coiled spring. Perhaps it was the people. There seemed the normal number of pedestrians, but they were not like pedestrians elsewhere, Seldon thought. Ordinarily, in the press of business, pedestrians were self-absorbed and in the endless crowds on the endless thoroughfares of Trantor, people could only survive--psychologically--by ignoring each other. Eyes slid away. Brains were closed off. There was an artificial privacy with each person enclosed in a velvet fog of his or her own making. Or there was the ritualistic friendliness of an evening promenade in those neighborhoods that indulged in such things. But here in Billibotton, there was neither friendliness nor neutral withdrawal. At least not where outsiders were concerned. Every person who passed, moving in either direction, turned to stare at Seldon and Dors. Every pair of eyes, as though attached by invisible cords to the two outsiders, followed them with ill will.
The clothing of the Billibottoners tended to be smudged, old, and sometimes corn. There was a patina of ill-washed poverty over them and Seldon felt uneasy at the slickness of his own new clothes.
He said, "Where in Billibotton does Mother Rittah live, do you suppose?"
"I dont know," said Dors. "You brought us here, so you do the supposing. I intend to confine myself to the task of protection and I think Im going to find it necessary to do just that."
Seldon said, "I assumed it would only be necessary to ask the way of any passerby, but somehow Im not encouraged to do so."
"I dont blame you. I dont think youll find anyone springing to your assistance."
"On the other hand, there are such things as youngsters." He indicated one with a brief gesture of one hand. A boy who looked to be about twelve--in any case young enough to lack the universal adult male mustache had come to a full halt and was staring at them.
Dors said, "Youre guessing that a boy that age has not yet developed the full Billibottonian dislike of outsiders."
"At any rate," said Seldon, "Im guessing he is scarcely large enough to have developed the full Billibottonian penchant for violence. I suppose he might run away and shout insults from a distance if we approach him, but I doubt hell attack us."
Seldon raised his voice. "Young man."
The boy took a step backward and continued to stare.
Seldon said, "Come here," and beckoned.
The boy said, "Wa for, guy?"
"So I can ask you directions. Come closer, so I dont have to shout."
The boy approached two steps closer. His face was smudged, but his eyes were bright and sharp. His sandals were of different make and there was a large patch on one leg of his trousers.
He said, "Wa kind o directions?"
"Were trying to find Mother Rittah."
The boys eyes flickered. "Wa for, guy?"
"Im a scholar. Do you know what a scholar is?"
"Ya went to school?"
"Yes. Didnt you?"
The boy spat to one side in contempt. "Nah."
"I want advice from Mother Rittah--if youll take me to her."
"Ya want your fortune? Ya come to Billibotton, guy, with your fancy clothes, so I can tell ya your fortune. All bad."
"Whats your name, young man?"
"Whats it to ya?"
"So we can speak in a more friendly fashion. And so you can take me to Mother Rittahs place. Do you know where she lives?"
"Maybe yes, maybe no. My names Raych. Whats in it for me if I take ya?"
"What would you like, Raych?"
The boys eyes halted at Dorss belt. Raych said, "The lady got a couple o knives. Gimme one and Ill take ya to Mother Rittah."
"Those are grown peoples knives, Raych. Youre too young."
"Then I guess Im too young to know where Mother Rittah lives." And he looked up slyly through the shaggy halt that curtained his eyes.
Seldon grew uneasy. It was possible they might attract a crowd. Several men had stopped already, but had then moved on when nothing of interest seemed to be taking place. If, however, the boy grew angry and lashed out at them in word or deed, people would undoubtedly gather.
He smiled and said, "Can you read, Raych?"
Raych spat again. "Nah! Who wants to read?"
"Can you use a computer?"
"A talking computer? Sure. Anyone can."
"Ill tell you what, then. You take me to the nearest computer store and Ill buy you a little computer all your own and software that will teach you to read. A few weeks and youll be able to read."
It seemed to Seldon that the boys eyes sparkled at the thought, but--if so--they hardened at once.
"Nah, Knife or nothin."
"Thats the point, Raych. You learn to read and dont tell anyone and you can surprise people. After a while you can bet them you can read. Bet them five credits. You can win a few extra credits that way and you can buy a knife of your own."
The boy hesitated. "Nah! No one will bet me. No one got credits."
"If you can read, you can get a job in a knife store and you can save your wages and get a knife at a discount. How about that?"
"When ya gonna buy the talking computer?"
"Right now. Ill give it to you when I see Mother Rittah."
"You got credits?"
"I have a credit tile."
"Lets see ya buy the computer."
The transaction was carried through, but when the boy reached for it, Seldon shook his head and put it inside his pouch. "Youve got to get me to Mother Rittah first, Raych. Are you sure you know where to find her?"
Raych allowed a look of contempt to cross his face. "Sure I do. Ill take ya there, only ya better hand over the computer when we get there or Ill get some guys I know after you and the lady, so ya better watch out."
"You dont have to threaten us," said Seldon. "Well take care of our end of the deal."
Raych led them quickly along the walkway, past curious stares. Seldon was silent during the walk and so was Dors. Dors was far less lost in her own thoughts, though, for she clearly remained conscious of the surrounding people at all times. She kept meeting, with a level glare, the eyes of those passersby that turned toward them. On occasion, when there were footsteps behind them, she turned to look grimly back.
And then Raych stopped and said, "In here. She aint homeless, ya know."
They followed him into an apartment complex and Seldon, who had had the intention of following their route with a view to retracing his steps later, was quickly lost.
He said, "How do you know your way through these alleys, Raych?"
The boy shrugged. "I been loafin through them since I was a kid," he said. "Besides, the apartments are numbered--where they aint broken off--and theres arrows and things. You cant get lost if you know the tricks."
Raych knew the tricks, apparently, and they wandered deeper into the complex. Hanging over it all was an air of total decay: disregarded debris, inhabitants slinking past in clear resentment of the outsiders invasion. Unruly youngsters ran along the alleys in pursuit of some game or other. Some of them yelled, "Hey, get out o the way!" when their levitating ball narrowly missed Dors. And finally, Raych stopped before a dark scarred door on which the number 2782 glowed feebly.
"This iiiit," he said and held out his hand.
"First lets see whos inside," said Seldon softly. He pushed the signal button and nothing happened.
"It dont work," said Raych. "Ya gotta bang. Loud. She dont hear too good."
Seldon pounded his fist on the door and was rewarded with the sound of movement inside. A shrill voice called out, "Who wants Mother Rittah?"
Seldon shouted, "Two scholars!"
He tossed the small computer, with its small package of software attached, to Raych, who snatchediit, grinned, and took off at a rapid run.
Seldon then turned to face the opening door and Mother Rittah.

第六十九章
　　在凭空闪烁的路标写着“脐眼”的那一站，他们两人下了磁浮捷运。路标第一个字左边被弄脏了，只剩下一个暗淡的光点，这也许是一种意料中的象征。
他们走出车厢之后，沿着下方的人行道前进。此时刚过正午，乍看之下，脐眼似乎很像他们在达尔居住的那一带。
然而，空气中有一种刺鼻的味道，人行道处处可见丢弃的垃圾。由此即可看出，这个小区中绝对没有自动扫街器，此外，虽然人行道看来并无不同，此地的气氛却令人不舒服，有如扭得太紧的弹簧那般紧绷。
或许是因为人的关系，谢顿想，这里的行人数目并无太大差异，但他们与其他地方的行人不一样。通常，在繁重工作的压力下．每个行人心中只有自己；置身川陀无数大街小巷的无数人群中，人们唯有忽略他人才能活下去——就心理层面而言。例如目光绝不流连，大脑完全封闭；每个人罩在各自的浓雾中，隐匿在一种人工的隐私里。反之，在那些热衷于黄昏漫步的小区中，则充满一种仪式化的亲切感。
然而在脐眼这里，既没有亲切感也没有漠然的回避——至少对外人而言如此。每个擦身而过的人，不论是来是往，都会转头朝谢顿与铎丝瞪上一眼。每对眼睛仿佛都有隐形绳索系在这两个外人身上，带着恶意紧紧追着他们不放。
脐眼人的衣着较为肮脏、老旧，有些已经破损。这些衣服都带着一种没洗干净的晦暗，使谢顿对自己光鲜的新衣感到不安。
他说：“你想，瑞塔嬷嬷会住在脐眼哪里？”
“我不知道，”铎丝说，“你把我们带到这里，所以应该由你来想。我打算专注于保镖的工作，我想我唯一得做的事，就是保护你的安全。”
谢顿说：“我认为现在得做的事是找个人问路，但我就是不太想这么做。”
“我不会怪你，我想你找不到任何愿意帮助你的热心人士。”
“话说回来，别忘了还有少年人。”谢顿随手指了指其中一个。那个男孩看来大约十二岁，尚未蓄起成年男子不可或缺的八字胡，正停下脚步盯着他们两人看。
铎丝说：“你是在猜想，脐眼人对外人的厌恶还不会出现在这种年纪的男孩身上。”
“至少，”谢顿说，“我猜想他的年纪还不够大，不至于具有脐眼的暴力倾向。如果我们走近他，他可能会拔腿就跑，在老远的地方高声辱骂，但我不信他会攻击我们。”
谢顿提高声音说：“年轻人。”
男孩向后退了一步，继续瞪着他们两人。
谢顿说：“到这里来。”同时招了招手。
男孩说：“干啥，哥儿们？”
“我想跟你问路。走近点，我才不用大声吼。”
男孩向前走了两步。他的脸孔脏兮兮的，一双眼睛却明亮而敏锐。他穿的凉鞋式样与众不同，一只短裤腿上有个大补丁。他说：“啥样的路？”
“我们想要去找瑞塔嬷嬷。”
男孩的眼睛亮了起来：“干啥？”
“我是一名学者，你知道学者是什么吗？”
“你上过学？”
“没错，你没有吗？”
男孩不屑地向一旁啐了一口：“没。”
“我有事要请教瑞塔嬷嬷，希望你能带我去找她。”
“你要算命？哥儿们，你穿着拉风的衣服来脐眼，连我都能帮你算命，霉运当头。”
“你叫什么名字，年轻人？”
“这跟你何干？”
“这样我们才能以更友善的方式交谈，这样你才能带我去瑞塔嬷嬷的住处。你知道她住在哪里吗？”
“也许知，也许不知。我叫芮奇，如果我带你去，我有什么好处？”
“你想要什么，芮奇？”
芮奇的日光停留在铎丝的腰带上，他说：“这大姐带着双刀，给我一把，我就带你去找瑞塔嬷嬷。”
“那是成人用的刀，芮奇，你的年纪还太小。”
“那我也认为我的年纪太小，根本不知道瑞塔嬷嬷住在哪里。”说完他抬起头，透过遮住眼睛的浓密头发狡猾地望着对方。
谢顿开始感到不安，他们这样有可能引来一群人。几名男子已经停下来，但在发现似乎不会发生什么有趣的事之后，他们全都掉头离去。然而，如果这个男孩发起脾气，以言语或行动攻击他们，街上的人无疑会群聚过来。
他微微一笑：“你识字吗，芮奇？”
芮奇又啐了一口：“不！谁要识字？”
“你会用计算机吗？”
“会说话的计算机？当然，任何人都会。”
“那么，我告诉你怎么办。你带我到最近的一家计算机店，我帮你买一台属于你自己的小计算机，以及一套能教你识字的软件。几星期之后，你就识字了。”
谢顿发觉男孩的眼睛似乎因此亮了起来，但只一会儿，那双眼睛又随即转趋强硬：“不，不给刀子就拉倒。”
“关键就在这里，芮奇。你自己学识字，别告诉任何人。过一阵子之后，你可以打赌说你会识字，和他们打赌行个信用点。这样你能赢得不少零用钱，可以帮自己买把刀子。”
男孩犹豫了一下：“不！没人会和我打赌，没人有信用点。”
“如果你识字，就能在刀店找到一份工作。你把工资存起来，可以用折扣价买一把刀子。这样好小好？”
“你什么时候去买会说话的计算机？”
“现在，等我见到瑞塔嬷嬷就给你。”
“你有信用点？”
“我有一张信用磁卡。”
“让我们一起去买计算机。”
计算机的交易进行得很顺利，但是当男孩伸手要接过计算机时，谢顿却摇了摇头，将它放进自己的囊袋。“你得先带我去找瑞塔嬷嬷，芮奇。你确定自己知道在哪儿能找到她吗？”
芮奇让不屑的表情掠过脸庞：“我当然确定，我会带你到那儿去，只是我们到了那里之后，你最好把计算机给我。否则我会找些我认识的哥儿们。去追你和这个大姐，所以你最好小心点。”
“你不必威胁我们，”谢顿说，“我们自会履行承诺。”
芮奇带着他们沿人行道快步走去，穿过了许多好奇的目光。
谢顿在行走时一言不发，铎丝也一样。不过与谢顿比较之下，铎丝儿乎没有什么心事，因为她显然始终在警戒周遭的人群。对于那些转头看他们的路人，她一律以凶狠的眼神直视回去。有些时候，当他们身后传来脚步声，她会立刻转头怒目而视。
然后芮奇停了下来，说道：“就在这里。你知道，她不是无家可归。”
他们跟着他进入一组公寓群。谢顿本想在心中默记走过的路线，以便待会儿能自行找到出路，但很快就迷失了方向。
他说：“你怎么知道在这此巷道中该走哪一条，芮奇？”
男孩耸了耸肩：“打从我还是小孩的时候，我就开始在这些巷道中游荡。”他说，“此外，这些公寓都有号码——只要没脱落，而且还有箭头和其他记号。如果你知道这些窍门，你就不可能迷路。”
芮奇显然深通这些窍门，于是他们逐渐深入公寓群。目所能及尽是一种完全腐朽的气氛：无人清理的瓦砾堆，居民脸上一闪而过的对外人入侵的明显恨意。又皮又野的少年沿着巷道奔跑追逐，似乎正在进行某种游戏。当他们的飞球险些击中铎丝时，有些还大叫道：“嘿，让路！”
最后，芮奇停在一扇斑驳的深色门前，上面微微闪着二七八七这组数宁。
“这里就是。”他一面说，一面伸出手来。
“先让我们看看谁在里面。”谢顿轻声说道。他按下讯号钮，可是没有任何反应。
“没用，”芮奇说，“你得捶门，捶得很响才行。她的耳朵不太好。”
于是谢顿握拳猛捶门板，里面立刻有了动静。一个尖锐的声音传出来：“谁要见瑞塔嬷嬷？”
谢顿喊道：“两名学者！”
他将小计算机连同附带的软件套件一起扔给芮奇，芮奇一把抓住，咧嘴一笑，立刻快步跑开了。然后谢顿转过头来，面对着打开的门与门后的瑞塔嬷嬷。
Chapter 70

Mother Rittah was well into her seventies, perhaps, but had the kind of face that, at first sight, seemed to belie that. Plump cheeks, a little mouth, a small round chin slightly doubled. She was very short--not quite 1.5 meters tall--and had a thick body.
But there were fine wrinkles about her eyes and when she smiled, as she smiled at the sight of them, others broke out over her face. And she moved with difficulty.
"Come in, come in," she said in a soft high-pitchedivoice and peered at them as though her eyesight was beginning to fail. "Outsiders ... Outworlders even. Am I right? You dont seem to have the Trantor smell about you."
Seldon wished she hadnt mentioned smell. The apartment, overcrowded and littered with small possessions that seemed dim and dusty, reeked with food odors that were on the edge of rancidity. The air was so thick and clinging that he was sure his clothes would smell strongly of it when they left.
He said, "You are right, Mother Rittah. I am Hari Seldon of Helicon. My friend is Dors Venabili of Cinna."
"So," she said, looking about for an unoccupied spot on the floor where she could invite them to sit, but finding none suitable.
Dors said, "We are willing to stand, Mother."
"What?" she looked up at Dors. "You must speak briskly, my child. My hearing is not what it was when I was your age."
"Why dont you get a hearing device?" said Seldon, raising his voice.
"It wouldnt help, Master Seldon. Something seems to be wrong with the nerve and I have no money for nerve rebuilding.--You have come to learn the future from old Mother Rittah?"
"Not quite," said Seldon. "I have come to learn the past."
"Excellent. It is such a strain to decide what people want to hear."
"It must be quite an art," said Dors, smiling.
"It seems easy, but one has to he properly convincing. I earn my fees."
"If you have a credit outlet," said Seldon. "We will pay any reasonable fees if you tell us about Earth--without cleverly designing what you tell us to suit what we want to hear. We wish to hear the truth."
The old woman, who had been shuffling about the room, making adjustments here and there, as though to make it all prettier and more suitable for important visitors, stopped short. "What do you want to know about Earth?"
"What is it, to begin with?"
The old woman turned and seemed to gaze off into space. When she spoke, her voice was low and steady.
"It is a world, a very old planet. It is forgotten and lost."
Dors said, "It is not part of history. We know that much."
"It comes before history, child," said Mother Rittah solemnly. "It existed in the dawn of the Galaxy and before the dawn. It was the only world with humanity." She nodded firmly.
Seldon said, "Was another name for Earth ... Aurora?"
And now Mother Rittahs face misted into a frown. "Where did you hear that?"
"In my wanderings. I have heard of an old forgotten world named Aurora on which humanity lived in primordial peace."
"Its a lie." She wiped her mouth as though to get the taste of what she had just heard out of it. "That name you mention must never be mentioned except as the place of Evil. It was the beginning of Evil. Earth was alone till Evil came, along with its sister worlds. Evil nearly destroyed Earth, but Earth rallied and destroyed Evil--with the help of heroes."
"Earth was before this Evil. Are you sure of that?"
"Long before. Earth was alone in the Galaxy for thousands of years--millions of years."
"Millions of years? Humanity existed on it for millions of years with no other people on any other world?"
"Thats true. Thats true. Thats true."
"But how do you know all this? Is it all in a computer program? Or a printout? Do you have anything I can read?"
Mother Rittah shook her head. "I heard the old stories from my mother, who heard it from hers, and so on far back. I have no children, so I tell the stories to others, but it may come to an end. This is a time of disbelief."
Dors said, "Not really, Mother. There are people who speculate about prehistoric times and who study some of the tales of lost worlds."
Mother Rittah made a motion of her arm as though to wipe it away. "They look at it with cold eyes. Scholarly. They try to fit it in with their notions. I could tell you stories for a year of the great hero Ba-Lee, but you would have no time to listen and I have lost the strength to tell."
Seldon said, "Have you ever heard of robots?"
The old woman shuddered and her voice was almost a scream. "Why do you ask such things? Those were artificial human beings, evil in themselves and the work of the Evil worlds. They were destroyed and should never be mentioned."
"There was one special robot, wasnt there, that the Evil worlds hated?"
Mother Rittah tottered toward Seldon and peered into his eyes. He could feel her hot breath on his face. "Have you come to mock me? You know of these things and yet you ask? Why do you ask?"
"Because I wish to know."
"There was an artificial human being who helped Earth. He was Da-Nee, friend of Ba-Lee. He never died and lives somewhere, waiting for his time to return. None knows when that time will be, but someday he will come and restore the great old days and remove all cruelty, injustice, and misery. That is the promise."
At this, she closed her eyes and smiled, as if remembering ...
Seldon waited a while in silence, then sighed and said, "Thank you, Mother Rittah. You have been very helpful. What is your fee?"
"So pleasant to meet Outworlders," the old woman replied. "Ten credits. May I offer you some refreshment?"
"No, thank you," said Seldon earnestly. "Please take twenty. You need only tell us how to get back to the Expressway from here.--And, Mother Rittah, if you can arrange to have some of your tales of Earth put into a computer disc, I will pay you well."
"I would need so much strength. How well?"
"It would depend on how long the story is and how well it is told. I might pay a thousand credits."
Mother Rittah licked her lips. "A thousand credits? But how will I find you when the story is told?"
"I will give you the computer code number at which I can be reached."
After Seldon gave Mother Rittah the code number, he and Dors left, thankful for the comparatively clean odor of the alley outside. They walked briskly in the direction indicated by the old woman.
第七十章
　　瑞塔嬷嬷或许已有七十好几，不过她的脸孔乍一看似乎没那么老。她有着丰满的面颊、一张小嘴，以及又小又圆的双下巴。她的个子很矮——还不到一百五十厘米，却有一副粗壮的身躯。
不过她双眼周围有着细微的皱纹。当她微笑的时候——例如她见到他们之后露出的笑容——脸部其他各处的皱纹也会绽露出来。此外，她的行动有些困难，“进来，进来。”她一面以轻柔高亢的声音说，一面眯着眼睛凝视他们两人，仿佛她的视力已开始减退。“外人……甚至是外星人士，我说对了吗？你们身上似乎没有川陀的气味。”
谢顿真希望她没提到气味。这间过分拥挤的公寓发出一股食物的怪味，几乎接近腐臭的味道。屋内还有许多四处乱丢的小东西，看来陈旧而盖满灰尘。这里的空气浑浊黏稠，他可以确定当他们离去后，他的衣服仍会带着这种强烈的气味。
他说：“你说对了，瑞塔嬷嬷。我是来自赫利肯的哈里•谢顿，我的朋友是来自锡纳的铎丝•凡纳比里。”
“好。”她一面说，一面在地板上寻找空位，以便邀他们坐下，可是找不到合适的地方。
铎丝说：“我们乐意站着，嬷嬷。”
“什么？”她抬起头望向铎丝，“你说话必须中气十足，孩子。我的听力已经不像你这个年纪时那么好。”
“你为什么不弄个助听装置？”谢顿提高音量说。
“那没有帮助，谢顿老爷。好像是神经方面出了毛病，我却没钱去做神经重建。你们是来向瑞塔老嬷嬷请教未来之事？”
“并不尽然，”谢顿说，“我是来请教过去之事。”
“好极了。判断人们想听些什么可不容易。”
“那必定是一门高深的艺术。”铎丝微笑着说。
“它看来容易，可是必须说得别人心服口服。我就靠它赚钱为生。”
“如果你有刷卡插座，”谢顿说，“我们会付你任何合理的酬劳。只要你告诉我们有关地球的事，不要为了满足我们而编织巧妙的话语，我们只想听事实。”
老妇人本来一直在房中踱来踱去，东摸摸、两弄弄，仿佛要将房间弄得更漂亮，更适合两位来访的贵客。此时她忽然停下来．说道：“你要知道有关地球的什么事？”
“首先，它究竟是什么？”
老妇人转过身来，目光似乎投射到太空中。当她开始说话的时候，她的声音变得低沉而稳重。
“它是一个世界，一个非常古老的行星。它遭人遗忘，如今下落不明。”
铎丝说：“它并非历史的一部分，这点我们还知道。”
“它比历史更为古老，孩子。”瑞塔嬷嬷严肃地说，“它存在于银河的黎明期，甚至在黎明期之前。当时它是唯一拥有人类的世界。”她坚定地点了点头。
谢顿说：“地球的别名是不是……奥罗拉？”
这时，瑞塔嬷嬷的脸孔突然皱成一团：“你是从哪里听来的？”
“在我四处飘荡的过程中，听说有个古老而遭人遗忘的世界叫奥罗拉，上面的人曾经享有太初的平静岁月。”
“那是个谎言。”她擦了擦嘴，仿佛要将她刚才听到的东两从嘴边抹去，“你提到的那个名字绝对不可再提，它只能指邪恶之地，它是邪恶的源头。在邪恶之地和它的姐妹世界登场前，地球一直是独一无二的。邪恶之地几乎毁灭了地球，但是地球人最后团结起来，借着一些英雄的帮助，终于摧毁了邪恶之地。”
“地球早于这个邪恶之地，你确定这点吗？”
“早得太多。地球曾在银河中独处数万年——乃至数百万年。”
“数百万年？人类在其上存在了数百万年，而其他任何世界都没有人？”
“没错，那是事实，事实就是如此。”
“但你是如何知道这些的呢？这些都在一个计算机程序里吗？或是住一份列印表中？你有任何东西能让我读一读吗？”
瑞塔嬷嬷摇了摇头：“我从我母亲那里听来这些古老的故事，她又是从她的母亲那里听来，自古就是这样传下来的。我没有子女，所以我把这些故事说给别人听。可是它也许会就此失传，这是个失去信仰的时代。”
铎丝说：“并非真正如此，嬷嬷。还是有人在推论史前时代的种种可能，并且研究有关那些失落世界的传说。”
瑞塔嬷嬷手臂挥了挥，仿佛要将那句话扫开。“他们用冷眼面对这个问题，以学术的眼光。他们试图将它纳入他们的观念中。有关大英雄巴雳的故事，我可以跟你说上一年，但你不会有那么多时间听，我也没有那么多精力讲。”
谢顿说：“你曾听说过机仆吗？”
老妇人突然抖了一下，她的声音几乎变作尖叫。“你为什么要问这种事？那种东西是人工的人类，是那些邪恶世界的产物，本身就是一种邪恶。它们早就遭到毁灭，再也不该提起。”
“曾有一个特殊的机仆，是那些邪恶世界憎恨的对象，对不对？”
瑞塔嬷嬷蹒跚地走向谢顿，紧紧盯着他的双眼。他甚至能感到她的热气喷在自己脸上。“你是专门来愚弄我的吗？你已经知道这些事，而你还要问？你为什么要问？”
“因为我希望知道。”
“曾有一个人工的人类帮助地球，他名叫丹尼，是巴雳的朋友。他从来没死，一直活在某个角落，等待他的时代重返。没有人知道那是什么时候，不过总有一天他会回来，复兴那个伟大的古老时代，并除去所有的残酷、不义和悲惨。那是他的承诺。”说到这里，她闭上眼睛．露出微笑，好像回想起……
谢顿默默等了一会儿，然后叹了一口气。“谢谢你，瑞塔嬷嬷。你对我有很大的帮助，我该付你多少酬劳？”
“很高兴能遇见外星人士，”老妇人答道，“十个信用点。我能招待你们一些吃的吗？”
“不用了，谢谢你。”谢顿一本正经地说．“请收下二十点，你只需告诉我们怎样从这里回到捷运站。还有，瑞塔嬷嬷，如果你能设法将有关地球的传说录进电脑磁盘一些，我会付你很好的价钱。”
“有多好？这将花费我不少力气。”
“那要看故事有多长，以及说得有多好。我也许会付一千点。”
瑞塔嬷嬷舔了舔嘴唇：“一千点？可是，当故事录好之后，我要怎样才能找到你？”
“我会给你一个计算机址码，你可以通过它联络到我。”
谢顿将计算机址码写给瑞塔嬷嬷后，便与铎丝一同离去。相较之下，外而巷道的空气清新宜人，令他感到谢天谢地。他们根据老妇人的指引，踏着轻快的步伐向前走去。
Chapter 71
Dors said, "That wasnt a very long interview, Hari."
"I know. The surroundings were terribly unpleasant and I felt I had learned enough. Amazing how these folktales tend to magnify."
"What do you mean, magnify?"
"Well, the Mycogenians fill their Aurora with human beings who lived for centuries and the Dahlites fill their Earth with a humanity that lived for millions of years. And both talk of a robot that lives forever. Still, it makes one think."
"As far as millions of years go, theres room for-- Where are we going?"
"Mother Rittah said we go in this direction till we reach a rest area, then follow the sign for CENTRAL WALKWAY, bearing left, and keep on following the sign. Did we pass a rest area on the way in?"
"We may be leaving by a route different from the one we came in. I dont remember a rest area, but I wasnt watching the route. I was keeping my eye on the people we passed and--"
Her voice died away. Up ahead the alley swelled outward on both sides. Seldon remembered. They had passed that way. There had been a couple of ratty couch pads resting on the walkway floor on either side. There was, however, no need for Dors to watch passersby going out as she had coming in. There were no passersby. But up ahead in the rest area they spotted a group of men, rather large-sized for Dahlites, mustaches bristling, bare upper arms muscular and glistening under the yellowish indoor light of the walkway. Clearly, they were waiting for the Outworlders and, almost automatically, Seldon and Dors came to a halt. For a moment or two, the tableau held. Then Seldon looked behind him hastily. Two or three additional men had stepped into view.
Seldon said between his teeth, "Were trapped. I should not have let you come, Dors."
"On the contrary. This is why Im here, but was it worth your seeing Mother Rittah?"
"If we get out of this, it was."
Seldon then said in a loud and firm voice, "May we pass?"
One of the men ahead stepped forward. He was fully Seldons height of 1.73 meters, but broader in the shoulders and much more muscular. A bit flabby at the waist, though, Seldon noted.
"Im Marron," he said with self-satisfied significance, as though the name ought to have meaning, "and Im here to tell you we dont like Outworlders in our district. You want to come in, all right--but if you want to leave, youll have to pay."
"Very well. How much?"
"All youve got. You rich Outworlders have credit tiles, right? Just hand them over."
"No."
"No point saying no. Well just take them."
"You cant take them without killing me or hurting me and they wont work without my voiceprint. My normal voiceprint."
"Thats not so, Master--see, Im being polite--we can take them away from you without hurting you very much."
"How many of you big strong men will it take? Nine? No." Seldon counted rapidly. "Ten."
"Just one. Me."
"With no help?"
"Just me."
"If the rest of you will clear away and give us room, I would like to see you try it, Marron."
"You dont have a knife, Master. You want one?"
"No, use yours to make the fight even. Ill fight without one."
Marron looked about at the others and said, "Hey, this puny guy is a sport. He dont even sound scared. Thats sort of nice. It would be a shame to hurt him. I tell you what, Master. Ill take the girl. If you want me to stop, hand over your credit tile and her tile and use your right voices to activate them. If you say no, then after Im through with the girl ... and thatll take some time"--he laughed--"Ill just have to hurt you."
"No," said Seldon. "Let the woman go. Ive challenged you to a fight--one to one, you with a knife, me without. If you want bigger odds, Ill fight two of you, but let the woman go."
"Stop, Hari!" cried out Dors. "If he wants me, let him come and get me. You stay right where you are, Hari, and dont move."
"You hear that?" said Marron, grinning broadly. " You stay right where you are, Hari, and dont move. I think the little lady wants me. You two, keep him still."
Each of Seldons arms were caught in an iron grip and he felt the sharp point of a knife in his back.
"Dont move," said a harsh whisper in his ear, "and you can watch. The lady will probably like it. Marrons pretty good at this."
Dors called out again. "Dont move, Hari!" She turned to face Marron watchfully, her half-closed hands poised near her belt.
He closed in on her purposefully and she waited till he had come within arms length, when suddenly her own arms flashed and Marron found himself facing two large knives.
For a moment, he leaned backward and then he laughed. "The little lady has two knives--knives like the big boys have. And Ive only got one. But thats fair enough." His knife was swiftly out. "I hate to have to cut you, little lady, because it will be more fun for both of us if I dont. Maybe I can just knock them out of your hands, huh?"
Dors said, "I dont want to kill you. Ill do all I can to avoid doing so. Just the same, I call on all to witness, that if I do kill you, it is to protect my friend, as I am honor-bound to do."
Marron pretended to be terrified. "Oh, please dont kill me, little lady." Then he burst into laughter and was joined by the other Dahlites present. Marron lunged with his knife, quite wide of the mark. He tried it again, then a third time, but Dors never budged. She made no attempt to fend off any motion that was not truly aimed at her.
Marrons expression darkened. He was trying to make her respond with panic, but he was only making himself seem ineffectual. The next lunge was directly at her and Dorss left-hand blade moved flashingly and caught his with a force that pushed his arm aside. Her right-hand blade flashed inward and made a diagonal slit in his T-shirt. A thin bloody line smeared the dark-haired skin beneath. Marron looked down at himself in shock as the onlookers gasped in surprise.
Seldon felt the grip on him weaken slightly as the two who held him were distracted by a duel not going quite as they had expected. He tensed himself.
Now Marron lunged again and this time his left hand shot outward to enclose Dorss right wrist. Again Dorss left-hand blade caught his knife and held it motionless, while her right hand twisted agilely and drew downward, even as Marrons left hand closed upon it. It closed on nothing but the blade and when he opened his hand there was a bloody line down the palm.
Dors sprang back and Marron, aware of the blood on his chest and hand, roared out chokingly, "Someone toss me another knife!" There was hesitation and then one of the onlookers tossed his own knife underhanded. Marron reached for it, but Dors was quicker. Her right-hand blade struck the thrown knife and sent it flying backward, whirling as it went.
Seldon felt the grips on his arms weaken further. He lifted them suddenly, pushing up and forward, and was free. His two captors turned toward him with a sudden shout, but he quickly kneed one in the groin and elbowed the other in the solar plexus and both went down.
He knelt to draw the knives of each and rose as double-armed as Dors. Unlike Dors, Seldon did not know how to handle the blades, but he knew the Dahlites would scarcely be aware of that.
Dors said, "Just keep them off, Hari. Dont attack yet.--Marron, my next stroke will not be a scratch."
Marron, totally enraged, roared incoherently and charged blindly, attempting by sheer kinetic energy to overwhelm his opponent. Dors, dipping and sidestepping, ducked under his right arm, kicked her foot against his right ankle, and down he crashed, his knife flying.
She then knelt, placed one blade against the back of his neck and the other against his throat, and said, "Yield!"
With another yell, Marron struck out against her with one arm, pushed her to one side, then scrambled to his feet.
He had not yet stood up completely when she was upon him, one knife slashing downward and hacking away a section of his mustache. This time he yowled like a large animal in agony, clapping his hand to his face. When he drew it away, it was dripping blood.
Dors shouted, "It wont grow again, Marron. Some of the lip went with it. Attack once more and youre dead meat."
She waited, but Marron had had enough. He stumbled away, moaning, leaving a trail of blood.
Dors turned toward the others. The two that Seldon had knocked down were still lying there, unarmed and not anxious to get up. She bent down, cut their belts with one of her knives and then slit their trousers. "This way, youll have to hold your pants up when you walk," she said. She stared at the seven men still on their feet, who were watching her with awestruck fascination. "And which of you threw the knife?"
There was silence.
She said, "It doesnt matter to me. Come one at a time or all together, but each time I slash, someone dies."
And with one accord, the seven turned and scurried away. Dors lifted her eyebrows and said to Seldon, "This time, at least, Hummin cant complain that I failed to protect you."
Seldon said, "I still cant believe what I saw. I didnt know you could do anything like that--or talk like that either."
Dors merely smiled. "You have your talents too. We make a good pair. Here, retract your knife blades and put them into your pouch. I think the news will spread with enormous speed and we can get out of Billibotton without fear of being stopped."
She was quite right.
Undercover
DAVAN-- ... In the unsettled times marking the final centuries of the First Galactic Empire, the typical sources of unrest arose from the fact that political and military leaders jockeyed for "supreme" power (a supremacy that grew more worthless with each decade). Only rarely was there anything that could be called a popular movement prior to the advent of psychohistory. In this connection, one intriguing example involves Davan, of whom little is actually known, but who may have met with Hari Seldon at one time when ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第七十一章
　　铎丝说：“这不是一次很长的晤谈，哈里。”
“我知道，可是那里简直令人受不了，而且我觉得打听得够多了。真难想象这些民间传说如何放大到这种程度。”
“你所谓‘放大’是什么意思？”
“嗯，麦曲生人将他们的奥罗拉说成上面住有能活好几世纪的人，达尔人则将他们的地球说成上面存在延续数百万年的人类，而两者都提到一个长生不死的机器人……这的确耐人寻味。”
“既然有好几百万年，就该有机会——我们现在要到哪里？”
“瑞塔嬷嬷说我们应该沿着这个方向走，直到抵达一个休息站，然后找一个写着‘中央走道’的路标，沿着左边走，再一直跟着那个路标前进。我们来的时候有没有经过一个休息站？”
“我们现在走的这条路，也许和来时的路线不同。我不记得有个休息区，不过刚才我没注意看路。我的眼睛一直紧盯着我们身边的路人，而且……”
她的声音逐渐消失——前方的巷道两侧向外敞开。
谢顿想了起来，他们的确曾经路过这里。他还记得在两侧的人行道地板上，弃置着一些破烂的沙发垫。
然而，铎丝不必像进来时那样防范路人，因为现在一个路人也没有。不过在前面的休息区里，他们发现有一群人。就达尔人而言，那群人的个头相当高大。他们的八字胡向上竖起；在人行道的昏黄光线照耀下，他们裸露的上臂全都肌肉暴实，而且皮肤闪着光泽。
显然，他们是在等待这两位外星人士，谢顿与铎丝几乎自然而然停下脚步。一时之间，双方形成了一个静止画面。然后谢顿匆匆向后看了看，发现后面又走出两三个人。
谢顿抿着嘴说：“我们落入陷阱了。我当初不该让你跟来，铎丝。”
“刚好相反，这正是我来这里的原因。可是你为了见瑞塔嬷嬷，付出这种代价值得吗？”
“只要我们能脱身，那就值得。”
然后，谢顿以响亮而坚定的声音说：“借过一下，好吗？”
前排一名男子向前走来。他与身高一米七三的谢顿不相上下，但肩膀比谢顿更宽，而且肌肉更结实。不过谢顿注意到他的腰部有点松垮。
“我叫玛隆，”他以自大自满的口气说，仿佛这个名字具有某种意义。“我在这里是要告诉你，我们不喜欢外星人士进我们的地盘。你想要进来，可以——但是如果你要出去，你就得付出代价。”
“很好，多少？”
“你身上所有的财产。你们阔气的外星人士都有信用磁卡，对吧？把它们通通交出来。”
“不行。”
“由不得你说不行，我们自己会动手。”
“除非将我打伤或杀掉，否则你休想得到。而且它们必须配合我的声纹，我的正常声纹。”
“并非如此，老爷——看，我很有礼貌。我们可以从你身上取走，却不必把你伤得太重。”
“需要多少你们这些粗壮汉子？九个？不，”谢顿很快数了一遍，“十个。”
“就一个，我。”
“没有帮手？”
“就我一个。”
“如果其他人能闪开，腾出点地方，我倒愿意看看你要怎么办。”
“你没有刀子，老爷，你要一把吗？”
“不，你用你的，这样打斗才算公半，我要赤手空拳和你打。”
玛隆环顾一下其他人：“嘿，这小个子真有种。听他的口气甚至不害怕，可真不简单。打伤他简直没面子——我告诉你怎么办，老爷，我要对付这姑娘，如果你要我停手，就把你和她的信用磁卡一块交出来，再用你们的正确声音启动。如果你说不，那么等我收拾完这姑娘……那可要点时间，”他放声大笑，“我就不得不伤害你。”
“不，”谢顿说，“让他走。我已经向你挑战——-对，你用刀子，我不用。如果你想掌握匹夫的胜算，我一个跟你们两个打，可是得先让她离开。”
“别说了，哈里！”铎丝叫道，“如果他要我，就让他过来抓我。你就待在那儿别动。”
“你听到了吗？”玛隆咧嘴大笑，“‘你就待在那儿别动。’我说这小妮子想要我。你们两个，把他看牢。”
谢顿的双臂立即像被两道铁箍紧紧锁住，他还感到背后抵着刀尖。
“不要动。”谢顿耳际传来厉声的耳语，“你可以看着。那女的也许会喜欢，玛隆这方面很高明。”
铎丝再度叫道：“别动，哈里！”说完，她转身警觉地直对玛隆，半握的双手挨近腰际的皮带。
他不怀好意地向她凑近，她则不动声色。等到他来到一臂之遥，她的双臂陡然一闪，玛隆蓦地发现眼前出现两把大刀。
他猛然向后一仰，随后哈哈大笑：“这小妮子有两把刀——像是大男生用的那种。而我却只有一把，不过这够公平了。”他把刀子迅速亮出来，“我可不愿意失手砍伤你，小妮子，因为要是不那么做，我们两个都会获得更多乐趣。也许我可以只把它们从你手上敲掉，啊？”
铎丝说：“我不想杀你，我将尽可能避免那样做。话说回来，我要求大家做个见证，如果我真杀了你，那是为了保护我的朋友，我责无旁贷。”
玛隆装出害怕的样子：“喔，请别杀我，小妮子。”说完他忽然哈哈大笑，在场的达尔人也跟着笑起来。
玛隆举刀向前刺出，落点距离铎丝相当远。接着他又试了第二次、第三次，但铎丝始终一动不动。对于并非真正瞄准她的攻击，她根本不曾试图抵挡。
玛隆的表情变得阴沉，他本想让她表现出惊慌失措的样子，不料只是使自已显得徒劳无功。于是，他下一次攻击直指铎丝。铎丝的左手刀立即闪电般挥出，猛力迎向他的武器，将他的手臂震开。她的右手刀则迅疾内转，在他的短衫上划出一道对角线。短衫下长满黑色胸毛的皮肤，立时绽出一条细微的血痕。
玛隆在震撼中低头单向自己，围观的人则在惊讶中喘不过气来。谢倾觉得抓着自已的两个人手劲放松了点；这场决斗并未完全按照他们的预期进行，他们的注意力全被引了过去。谢顿暗自蓄势待发。
玛隆再度举刀进攻，同时左手朝铎丝的右腕抓去。铎丝的左手刀再度挡住他的利刃，令它动弹不得；她的右手做了一个敏捷的回旋，在玛隆的左手挨近的当儿向下一沉。结果，除了刀刃之外他什么也没抓到，当他张开手的时候，手掌上赫然出现一道血痕。
铎丝随即向后跳开。玛隆在发觉胸部与手掌挂彩后，闷声咆哮道：“再扔把刀给我！”
一阵迟疑之后，一名旁观者将自己的刀偷偷掷出。玛隆正要伸手去接，铎丝的反应却比他更快。她的右手刀击向那把掷出的利刃，将它原路送回，那把刀一面飞还一面打转。
谢顿感到两只手臂上的抓力变得更弱。他突然举起双臂，向上往前一推，立时挣脱。抓他的两个人惊叫一声，转身面对着他，但他迅速以膝头踢向其中一人的腹股沟，并用手肘击向另一人的腹部，两人随即应声倒地。
他跪下去拔取那两人身上的佩刀，起身之后，他就成了像铎丝样的双刀客。
然而与铎丝不同的是，谢顿不懂如何使用这种武器。但他知道那此达尔人不会发觉这点。
铎丝说：“别让他们靠近就行，哈里，还不要攻击。玛隆，我的下一击将不只是皮肉伤。”
玛隆陷入极度的愤怒，一面发出毫无意义的咆哮。一面展开盲目的攻击，试图想以蛮力压倒对手。铎丝微一蹲身，向侧面踏出一步，低头避开他的右臂，同时在他的右脚踝踢了一记。玛降立刻瘫倒在地，手中的刀飞了出去。
然后她跪在地上，将刀架在他的后颈，另一把抵住他的喉头，说：“投降！”
玛隆大吼一声，猛力用手臂将她推开，挣扎着要站起来。
当她再度逼近时，他尚未完全站稳。只见一把刀向下砍去，他的八字胡马上被削去一节。这次他像一头重伤的巨兽般发出哀号，一把按住了脸部。当他将手拿开时，那只手上淌满鲜血。
铎丝喊道：“它不会再长出来了，玛隆，有一片嘴唇跟它一起飞了。敢再做一次攻击，你就是一具死尸。”
她严阵以待，但玛隆已经受够了。他一面呻吟，一面跌跌撞撞地逃开，沿途留下一条血迹。
铎丝转身面向其他人。被谢顿打倒的那两个仍躺在那里，他们已被缴械，并末急着想爬起来。她弯下腰，用一把刀将他们的皮带切断，又将他们的裤子划开。
“这样一来，你们就得提着裤子走路。”她说。
她瞪着仍站在原处的七个人，他们都以敬畏的眼神出神地望着她。“刚才扔刀子的是你们哪一个？”
众人一片沉默。
她又说：“对我而言没有差别。一个一个来或一起上都行，可是我每砍一刀，就会有一个人丧命。”
七个人不约而同立即转身，拔腿就逃。
铎丝扬起眉毛，对谢顿说：“至少这一次，夫铭不能责怪我未尽到保护你的责任。”
谢顿说：“我仍然无法相信我见到的一切。我一直不知道你有这种能耐——或是能说这样的话。”
铎丝只是微微一笑：“你也有你的本事，我们是一对好搭档。来，收起你手中的刀子，放进袋囊中吧。我想消息会迅速传开，我们可以顺利离开脐眼，不必担心再被拦住去路。”
她说得相当正确。
Chapter 72
Both Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili had taken rather lingering baths, making use of the somewhat primitive facilities available to them in the Tisalver household. They had changed their clothing and were in Seldons room when Jirad Tisalver returned in the evening. His signal at the door was (or seemed) rather timid. The buzz did not last long.
Seldon opened the door and said pleasantly, "Good evening, Master Tisalver. And Mistress."
She was standing right behind her husband, forehead puckered into a puzzled frown.
Tisalver said tentatively, as though he was unsure of the situation, "Are you and Mistress Venabili both well?" He nodded his head as though trying to elicit an affirmative by body language.
"Quite well. In and out of Billibotton without trouble and were all washed and changed. Theres no smell left." Seldon lifted his chin as he said it, smiling, tossing the sentence over Tisalvers shoulder to his wife. She sniffed loudly, as though testing the matter.
Still tentatively, Tisalver said, "I understand there was a knife fight."
Seldon raised his eyebrows. "Is that the story?"
"You and the Mistress against a hundred thugs, we were cold, and you killed them all. Is that so?" There was the reluctant sound of deep respect in his voice.
"Absolutely not," Dors put in with sudden annoyance. "Thats ridiculous. What do you think we are? Mass murderers? And do you think a hundred thugs would remain in place, waiting the considerable time it would take me--us--to kill them all? I mean, think about it."
"Thats what theyre saying," said Casilia Tisalver with shrill firmness. "We cant have that sort of thing in this house."
"In the first place," said Seldon, "it wasnt in this house. In the second, it wasnt a hundred men, it was ten. In the third, no one was killed. There was some altercation back and forth, after which they left and made way for us."
"They just made way. Do you expect me to believe that, Outworlders?" demanded Mistress Tisalver belligerently.
Seldon sighed. At the slightest stress, human beings seemed to divide themselves into antagonistic groups. He said, "Well, I grant you one of them was cut a little. Not seriously."
"And you werent hurt at all?" said Tisalver. The admiration in his voice was more marked.
"Not a scratch," said Seldon. "Mistress Venabili handles two knives excellently well."
"I dare say," said Mistress Tisalver, her eyes dropping to Dorss belt, "and thats not what I want to have going on here." Dors said sternly, "As long as no one attacks us here, thats what you wont have here."
"But on account of you," said Mistress Tisalver, "we have trash from the street standing at the doorway."
"My love," said Tisalver soothingly, "let us not anger--"
"Why?" spat his wife with contempt. "Are you afraid of her knives? I would like to see her use them here."
"I have no intention of using them here," said Dors with a sniff as loud as any that Mistress Tisalver had produced. "What is this trash from the street youre talking about?"
Tisalver said, "What my wife means is that an urchin from Billibotton--at least, judging by his appearance--wishes to see you and we are not accustomed to that sort of thing in this neighborhood. It undermines our standing." He sounded apologetic.
Seldon said, "Well, Master Tisalver, well go outside, find out what its all about, and send him on his business as quickly--"
"No. Wait," said Dors, annoyed. "These are our rooms. We pay for them. We decide who visits us and who does not. If there is a young man outside from Billibotton, he is nonetheless a Dahlite. More important, hes a Trantorian. Still more important, hes a citizen of the Empire and a human being. Most important, by asking to see us, he becomes our guest. Therefore, we invite him in to see us."
Mistress Tisalver didnt move. Tisalver himself seemed uncertain.
Dors said, "Since you say I killed a hundred bullies in Billibotton, you surely do not think I am afraid of a boy or, for that matter, of you two." Her right hand dropped casually to her belt.
Tisalver said with sudden energy, "Mistress Venabili, we do not intend to offend you. Of course these rooms are yours and you can entertain whomever you wish here." He stepped back, pulling his indignant wife with him, undergoing a burst of resolution for which he might conceivably have to pay afterward. Dors looked after them sternly.
Seldon smiled dryly. "How unlike you, Dors. I thought I was the one who quixotically got into trouble and that you were the calm and practical one whose only aim was to prevent trouble."
Dors shook her head. "I cant bear to hear a human being spoken of with contempt just because of his group identification--even by other human beings. Its these respectable people here who create those hooligans out there."
"And other respectable people," said Seldon, "who create these respectable people. These mutual animosities are as much a part of humanity--"
"Then youll have to deal with it in your psychohistory, wont you?"
"Most certainly--if there is ever a psychohistory with which to deal with anything at all.--Ah, here comes the urchin under discussion. And its Raych, which somehow doesnt surprise me."
第七十二章
第十五部 地下组织
达凡：……在第一银河帝国最后数世纪的不安岁月中，典型的动荡根源来自政治与军事领袖谋取“至高无上”权力的事实（平均每隔十年，这种至上的权力就会贬值一次）。
在心理史学出现之前，能够称为群众运动的事例少之又少。就此而论，其中一个耐人寻味的例子与达凡有关。此人的真实背景鲜为人知，但他可能曾遇见过哈里•谢顿，当时谢顿……
——《银河百科全书》


第七十二章
利用堤沙佛家现成的、有几分原始的沐浴没备，哈里•谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里双双洗了一个不算短的澡。当吉拉德•堤沙佛傍晚回到家的时候，他们两人已经换好衣服，一起待在谢顿的房间。堤沙佛发出的叫门信号（似乎）有些胆怯，蜂呜声没有持续多久。
谢顿打开门，愉快地说道：“晚安，堤沙佛老爷，还有夫人。”
她站在丈夫的正后方，前额皱成一团，显得十分疑惑。
堤沙佛仿佛不确定情况如何，他以试探性的口吻说：“你和凡纳比里夫人都好吧？”说完他点了点头，似乎想借身体语言引出肯定的答案。
“相当好。进出脐眼都毫无闲难，现在我们都已洗过澡，换过衣服，没有留下任何气味。”谢顿一面说，一面抬起下巴，面露微笑，让这些话越过堤沙佛的肩头抵达他的妻子面前。
她猛吸了几口气，像是在检验这点。
堤沙佛仍旧以试探性的几吻说：“我晓得曾经发生过一场刀战。”
谢顿扬起眉毛：“传闻是这样的吗？”
“我们听说，你和夫人对抗一百名凶徒，将他们全部杀掉。是不是这样？”他的声音透出一种控制不住的深度敬意。
“绝无此事，”铎丝插嘴道，她突然觉得很不耐烦，“那实在荒唐。你以为我们是什么？大屠杀的刽子手？你以为一百名凶徒会待在原地，等上好长一段时间，好让我——我们——把他们通通杀光？我的意思是，用脑筋想想。”
“他们都是这么说的。”卡西莉娅•堤沙佛以尖锐而坚定的口吻说：“我们不能让这种事发生在这栋房子里。”
“第一，”谢顿说，“它不是发生在这栋房子里。第二，没有一百个人，其实只有十个。第三，没有任何人被杀。当时的确发生些口角，然后对方就让路了。”
“他们就这么让路？你们期望我相信这种事吗，两位外星人士？”堤沙佛夫人咄咄逼人地追问。
谢顿叹了一口气。即使在最轻微的压力下，人类似乎也会分裂成敌对的集团。
他说：“好吧，我承认，他们其中一人被割伤了一点，并不严重。”
“而你们完全没受伤？”堤沙佛说，声音中的敬佩之意更加显著。
“毫发无损，”谢顿说，“凡纳比里夫人舞弄双刀的功夫好极了。”
“我就说嘛，”堤沙佛夫人的眼光落到铎丝的皮带上，“那不是我希望会在这里发生的事。”
铎丝断然地说：“只要没有人在这里攻击我们，你这里就不会发生那种事。”
“可是由于你们的缘故，”堤沙佛夫人又说，“我们家门口站了一个街上的废物。”
“亲爱的，”堤沙佛以安抚的口吻说，“别生气……”
“为什么？”他的妻子轻蔑地啐了一口，“你怕她的双刀吗？我倒想看看她在这里怎么耍。”
“我根本不打算在这里动刀。”铎丝哼了一声，与堤沙佛夫人刚才的哼声同样响亮，“你所谓街上的废物究竟是怎么回事？”
堤沙佛说：“我太太指的是一个来自脐眼的小鬼——至少，根据他的外表判断是这样的。他希望见你们，而我们这个小区对这种事并不习惯，这样有损我们的声誉。”他的话听来有些歉然。
谢顿说：“好吧，堤沙佛夫人，我们这就到外面去，弄明白到底是怎么回事，尽快把他打发走——”
“不，慢着。”铎丝说，她显然被惹恼了，“这里是我们的房间，我们付钱租下来的。应该由我们决定谁能而谁不能拜访我们。如果外面是个来自脐眼的年轻人，他无论如何也是个达尔人，更重要的是，他是个川陀人，更加重要的是，他是个帝国公民，是人类的一分子，而最重要的是，既然他要求见我们，他就是我们的客人。因此，我们要请他进来和我们见面。”
堤沙佛夫人没有任何反应，堤沙佛本人似乎不知如何是好。
铎丝义说：“既然你说我在脐眼杀了一百个土霸，你当然不会认为我会怕一个男孩，或者怕你们两位。”她的右手似乎不经意地落在皮带上。
堤沙佛突然中气十足地说：“凡纳比里大人，我们不打算冒犯你。这两间房当然是属于你们的，你们可以在这里招待任何希望招待的人。”在突如其来的一股决心驱使下，他开始向后退去，拉着气呼呼的妻子一同离开，虽然可以想见事后他将为此付出代价。
铎丝以严厉的眼光目送他们。
谢顿无奈地笑了笑：“这真不像你，铎丝。我一直以为，我才是那个满脑子狂想、专门惹是生非的人；而你则是那个冷静务实的人，总是尽可能省掉麻烦。”
铎丝摇了摇头：“一个人只因为他的出身背景，就受到他人——其他的人类如此轻视，我听到这种话便无法忍受。就是这里这些有头有脸的人，制造出那里那些不良少年。”
“而其他一批有头有脸的人，”谢顿说，“则制造出这里这批有头有脸的人。这些相互憎恨同样是人性的一部分……”
“那么，你得在你的心理史学中处理这一点，对不对？”
“一定会，只要真有一种心理史学能处理所自有问题——啊，我们谈论的那个小鬼来啦，是芮奇——这点我倒不惊讶。”
Chapter 73

Raych entered, looking about, clearly intimidated. The forefinger of his right hand reached for his upper lip as though wondering when he would begin to feel the first downy hairs there.
He turned to the clearly outraged Mistress Tisalver and bowed clumsily. "Thank ya, Missus. Ya got a lovely place."
Then, as the door slammed behind him, he turned to Seldon and Dors with an air of easy connoisseurship. "Nice place, guys."
"Im glad you like it," said Seldon solemnly. "How did you know we were here?"
"Followed ya. Howd ya think? Hey, lady"--he turned to Dors--"you dont fight like no dame."
"Have you watched many dames fight?" asked Dors, amused.
Raych rubbed his nose, "No, never seen none whatever. They dont carry knives, except little ones to scare kids with. Never scared me."
"Im sure they didnt. What do you do to make dames draw their knives?"
"Nothin. You just kid around a little. You holler, Hey, lady, lemme-- " He thought about it for a moment and said, "Nothin."
Dors said, "Well, dont try that on me."
"Ya kiddin? After what ya did to Marron? Hey, lady, whered you learn to fight that way?"
"On my own world."
"Could ya teach me?"
"Is that what you came here to see me about?"
"Akchaly, no. I came to bring ya a kind of message."
"From someone who wants to fight me?"
"No one wants to fight ya, lady. Listen, lady, ya got a reputation now. Everybody knows ya. You just walk down anywhere in old Billibotton and all the guys will step aside and let ya pass and grin and make sure they dont look cross-eyed at ya. Oh, lady, ya got it made. Thats why he wants to see ya."
Seldon said, "Raych, just exactly who wants to see us?"
"Guy called Davan."
"And who is he?"
"Just a guy. He lives in Billibotton and dont carry no knife."
"And he stays alive, Raych?"
"He reads a lot and he helps the guys there when they get in trouble with the govment. They kinda leave him alone. He dont need no knife."
"Why didnt he come himself, then?" said Dors. "Why did he send you?"
"He dont like this place. He says it makes him sick. He says all the people here, they lick the govments--" He paused, looked dubiously at the two Outworlders, and said, "Anyway, he wont come here. He said theyd let me in cause I was only a kid." He grinned. "They almost didnt, did they? I mean that lady there who looked like she was smellin somethin?" He stopped suddenly, abashed, and looked down at himself. "Ya dont get much chance to wash where I come from."
"Its all right," said Dors, smiling. "Where are we supposed to meet, then, if he wont come here? After all--if you dont mind--we dont feel like going to Billibotton."
"I told ya," said Raych indignantly. "Ya get free run of Billibotton, I swear. Besides, where he lives no one will bother ya."
"Where is it?" asked Seldon.
"I can take ya there. It aint far."
"And why does he want to see us?" asked Dors.
"Dunno. But he says like this--" Raych half-closed his eyes in an effort to remember. " Tell them I wanna see the man who talked to a Dahlite heatsinker like he was a human being and the woman who beat Marron with knives and didnt kill him when she mighta done so. I think I got it right."
Seldon smiled. "I think you did. Is he ready for us now?"
"Hes waiting."
"Then well come with you." He looked at Dors with a trace of doubt in his eyes.
She said, "All right. Im willing. Perhaps it wont be a trap of some sort. Hope springs eternal--"
第七十三章
　　芮奇一面走进来，一面东张西望，显然事先受过威吓。他的右手食指摸着上唇，仿佛在想不知何时会摸到该处冒出的第一撮细毛。
他转身面向显然气急败坏的堤沙佛夫人，以笨拙的动作鞠了一躬说：“谢谢你，姑奶奶，你有幢可爱的房子。”
房门在他身后“砰”地一声关上之后，他转过来面对谢顿与铎丝，以鉴赏家般的轻松口气说：“好地方，哥儿们。”
“很高兴你会喜欢，”谢顿严肃地说．“你怎么知道我们在这里？”
“跟踪你们，不然你以为呢？嘿，大姐，”他转向铎丝，“你的刀法不像个娘儿们。”
“你看过许多娘儿们斗刀吗？”铎丝打趣道。
芮奇摸了摸鼻子：“不，没见过。她们不带刀子，只带专门吓小孩的小刀，从来吓不倒我。”
“我确信她们办不到。你做了什么事，会让那些娘儿们拔出刀来？”
“啥也没……只是开个小玩笑，只是喊：‘嘿，大姐，让我……”’他想了一下子，又说：“啥也没做。”
铎丝说：“好吧，可别对我试那一套。”
“开玩笑！在你教训了玛隆一顿之后？嘿，大姐，你在哪里学的那种刀法？”
“在我自己的世界。”
“你能教我吗？”
“这就是你来这里见我的原因？”
“老实说，不是。我来是给你们捎个信。”
“哪个想跟我斗刀的人派你来的？”
“没人想和你斗刀，大姐。听我说，大姐，你现在大有名气，每个人都知道你。你老在脐眼随便走到哪儿，哥儿们都会闪到一旁让你通过，咧嘴微笑，以保证他们没用斗鸡眼瞧你。噢，大姐，你做到了，这就是他要见你们的原因。”
谢顿说：“芮奇，到底是谁要见我们？”
“一个叫达凡的哥儿们。”
“他是什么人？”
“就是个哥儿们。他住在脐眼，他不带刀子。”
“而他能活到现在，芮奇？”
“他读过许多书，哥儿们遇到政府找麻烦时他会帮忙。所以他们不惹他，他就不需要刀子。”
“那么，他为什么不自己来？”铎丝问道，“他为什么要派你来？”
“他不喜欢这个地方，他说这里让他恶心。他说这里的所有人，他们都舔政府的……”他顿了一下，迟疑地望着面前两位外星人士，“反正，他不会来这里。他说他们会让我进来，因为我只是个小孩。”他咧嘴一笑，“他们差点没这样做，对不对？我是说刚才那个大姐，她看来好像闻到什么？”
他突然打住，脸红了起来，又低头看了看自己：“在我住的那个地方，没多少机会洗澡。”
“没关系。”铎丝微笑着说，“既然他不来这里，那么，我们要在哪里见面？毕竟，希望你别介意，我们不太喜欢再去脐眼。”
“我告诉过你，”芮奇气愤地说，“你在脐眼可以自由来去，我发誓。而且，在他住的地方，没人会打扰你。”
“那是在哪里？”谢顿问道。
“我可带你们去，不太远。”
“他为什么要见我们？”铎丝问道。
“不知，但他像这么说——”芮奇眯起眼睛努力回想，…告诉他们，我要见那个和一名达尔热闾工谈过话，把他当人看待的那位男士，以及用双刀打败玛隆，可以杀他却没杀他的那位女士。’我想我背得没错。”
谢顿微微一笑：“我也这么想。他准备好了见我们吗？”
“他正在等。”
“那我们这就跟你去。”他望向铎丝，眼中带着一丝犹疑。
她说：“好吧，我愿意去。也许这不会是什么陷阱。希望总是无处不在……”
Chapter 74

There was a pleasant glow to the evening light when they emerged, a faint violet touch and a pinkish edge to the simulated sunset clouds that were scudding along. Dahl might have complaints of their treatment by the Imperial rulers of Trantor, but surely there was nothing wrong with the weather the computers spun out for them.
Dors said in a low voice, "We seem to be celebrities. No mistake about that."
Seldon brought his eyes down from the supposed sky and was immediately aware of a fair-sized crowd around the apartment house in which the Tisalvers lived. Everyone in the crowd stared at them intently. When it was clear that the two Outworlders had become aware of the attention, a low murmur ran through the crowd, which seemed to be on the point of breaking out into applause.
Dors said, "Now I can see where Mistress Tisalver would find this annoying. I should have been a little more sympathetic."
The crowd was, for the most part, poorly dressed and it was not hard to guess that many of the people were from Billibotton. On impulse, Seldon smiled and raised one hand in a mild greeting that was met with applause. One voice, lost in the safe anonymity of the crowd called out, "Can the lady show us some knife tricks?"
When Dors called back, "No, I only draw in anger," there was instant laughter. One man stepped forward. He was clearly not from Billibotton and bore no obvious mark of being a Dahlite. He had only a small mustache, for one thing, and it was brown, not black. He said, "Marlo Tanto of the Trantorian HV News. Can we have you in focus for a bit for our nightly holocast?"
"No," said Dors shortly. "No interviews."
The newsman did not budge. "I understand you were in a fight with a great many men in Billibotton--and won." He smiled. "Thats news, that is."
"No," said Dors. "We met some men in Billibotton, talked to them, and then moved on. Thats all there is to it and thats all youre going to get."
"Whats your name? You dont sound like a Trantorian."
"I have no name."
"And your friends name?"
"He has no name."
The newsman looked annoyed, "Look, lady. Youre news and Im just trying to do my job."
Raych pulled at Dorss sleeve. She leaned down and listened to his earnest whisper.
She nodded and straightened up again. "I dont think youre a newsman, Mr. Tanto. What I think you are is an Imperial agent trying to make trouble for Dahl. There was no fight and youre trying to manufacture news concerning one as a way of justifying an Imperial expedition into Billibotton. I wouldnt stay here if I were you. I dont think youre very popular with these people."
The crowd had begun to mutter at Dorss first words. They grew louder now and began to drift, slowly and in a menacing way, in the direction of Tanto. He looked nervously around and began to move away.
Dors raised her voice. "Let him go. Dont anyone touch him. Dont give him any excuse to report violence."
And they parted before him.
Raych said, "Aw, lady, you shoulda let them rough him up."
"Bloodthirsty boy," said Dors, "take us to this friend of yours."

第七十四章
　　他们出来的时候，室外的照明正映着傍晚时分的悦人光辉。模拟的黄昏云朵轻快地飞，带着淡淡的紫色，边缘则略呈粉红。川陀的帝国统治者给予达尔人的待遇，也许令他们颇有怨言，然而，计算机为他们选择的天气，却显然没有任何瑕疵。
铎丝压低声音说：“毫无疑问地，我们似乎成了名人。”
谢顿将视线沿着所谓的天空向下移，立刻察觉到堤沙佛家的公寓被一大批群众团团围住。
群众中每一个人都专注地望向他们。当两位外星人士显然察觉人群的关注时，一阵低沉的窃窃私语立刻传遍整个群众，似乎马上要转变成鼓掌与喝彩。
铎丝说：“现在我能了解堤沙佛夫人为何感到心烦，我应该更体谅她一点。”
大部分群众的穿着都不怎么体面，不难猜到其中有许多人来自脐眼。
由于一时兴起，谢顿露出微笑，并举起一只手微微打了个招呼，结果换来一阵喝彩。有人躲在人群中叫道：“这位小姐能否表演几招刀法？”
铎丝高声回答：“不行，我只有生气时才拔刀。”立刻换来一阵笑声。
一名男子向前走来，他显然并非来自脐眼，也没有达尔人的明显特征。原因之一是他只有两撇小胡子，而且是棕色而不是黑色。他说：“我是川陀全息新闻的马洛•唐图。我们能否请您稍微对准镜头，接受我们晚间全息新闻的访问？”
“不行，”铎丝断然答道，“不接受访问。”
那位记者毫不放松：“我了解您在脐眼曾与多名男子有过一场恶战——并且赢得胜利。”他微微一笑，“那是新闻，绝对没错。”
“不，”铎丝说，“我们在脐眼遇到一些男的，跟他们谈了几句，然后便继续赶路。事情的经过就是这样，这就是你的采访结果。”
“您尊姓大名？听您的口音不像川陀人。”
“我没有名字。”
“那您的朋友尊姓大名？”
“他也没有名字。”
新闻记者看来恼了。“听好，小姐。你是个新闻，而我只是在尽力完成我的工作。”
芮奇拉了拉锋丝的衣袖。于是她低下头来，听他一本正经地对她耳语了几句。
她点了点头，重新直起身子：“我认为你并不是记者，唐图先生。我倒认为你是一名帝国特务，正在试图给达尔找麻烦。根本没有打斗，你却试图制造这样的新闻，好为帝国征讨脐眼找到合理借口。我要是你的话，就不会待在这里，我不认为你在这些人之间多么受欢迎。”
铎丝在说第一句的时候，群众就开始交头接耳。现在他们的声音变得更大，而且开始以一种具有威胁性的方式，慢慢地朝唐图的方向移动。他紧张兮兮地四下望了望，然后拔腿就走。
铎丝提高音量说：“让他走，任何人都不要碰他。别让他有告发暴力行动的任何借口。”
于是众人为他计出一条路来。
芮奇说：“噢，大姐，你该让他们教训他一顿。”
“嗜血的小子，”锌丝说，“带我们去见你的那个朋友。”
Chapter 75

They met the man who called himself Davan in a room behind a dilapidated diner.
Far behind.
Raych led the way, once more showing himself as much at home in the burrows of Billibotton as a mole would be in tunnels underground in Helicon. It was Dors Venabili whose caution first manifested itself.
She stopped and said, "Come back, Raych. Exactly where are we going?"
"To Davan," said Raych, looking exasperated. "I told ya."
"But this is a deserted area. Theres no one living here." Dors looked about with obvious distaste. The surroundings were lifeless and what light panels there were did not glower [but] did so only dimly.
"Its the way Davan likes it," said Raych. "Hes always changing around, staying here, staying there. Ya know ... changing around."
"Why?" demanded Dors.
"Its safer, lady."
"From whom?"
"From the govment."
"Why would the government want Davan?"
"I dunno, lady. Tell ya what. Ill tell ya where he is and tell ya how to go and ya go on alone--if ya dont want me to take ya."
Seldon said, "No, Raych, Im pretty sure well get lost without you. In fact, you had better wait till were through so you can lead us back."
Raych said at once, "Whats in it fme? Ya expect me to hang around when I get hungry?"
"You hang around and get hungry, Raych, and Ill buy you a big dinner. Anything you like."
"Ya say that now. Mister. How do I know?"
Dorss hand flashed and it was holding a knife, blade exposed, "Youre not calling us liars, are you, Raych?"
Raychs eyes opened wide. He did not seem frightened by the threat. He said, "Hey, I didnt see that. Do it again."
"Ill do it afterward--if youre still here. Otherwise"--Dors glared at him--"well track you down."
"Aw, lady, come on," said Raych. "Ya aint gonna track me down. Ya aint that kind. But Ill be here." He struck a pose. "Ya got my word." And he led them onward in silence, though the sound of their shoes was hollow in the empty corridors.
Davan looked up when they entered, a wild look that softened when he saw Raych.
He gestured quickly toward the two others--questioningly.
Raych said, "These are the guys." And, grinning, he left.
Seldon said, "I am Hari Seldon. The young lady is Dors Venabili." He regarded Davan curiously. Davan was swarthy and had the thick black mustache of the Dahlite male, but in addition he had a stubble of beard. He was the first Dahlite whom Seldon had seen who had not been meticulously shaven. Even the bullies of Billibotton had been smooth of cheek and chin. Seldon said, "What is your name, sir?"
"Davan. Raych must have told you."
"Your second name."
"I am only Davan. Were you followed here, Master Seldon?"
"No, Im sure we werent. If we had, then by sound or sight, I expect Raych would have known. And if he had not, Mistress Venabili would have."
Dors smiled slightly. "You have faith in me, Hari."
"More all the time," he said thoughtfully.
Davan stirred uneasily. "Yet youve already been found."
"Found?"
"Yes, I have heard of this supposed newsman."
"Already?" Seldon looked faintly surprised. "But I suspect he really was a newsman ... and harmless. We tatted him an Imperial agent at Raychs suggestion, which was a good idea. The surrounding crowd grew threatening and we got rid of him."
"No," said Davan, "he was what you called him. My people know the man and he does work for the Empire.--But then you do not do as I do. You do not use a false name and change your place of abode. You go under your own names, making no effort to remain undercover. You are Hari Seldon, the mathematician."
"Yes, I am," said Seldon. "Why should I invent a false name?"
"The Empire wants you, does it not?"
Seldon shrugged. "I stay in places where the Empire cannot reach out to take me."
"Not openly, but the Empire doesnt have to work openly. I would urge you to disappear ... really disappear."
"Like you ... as you say," said Seldon looking about with an edge of distaste. The room was as dead as the corridors he had walked through. It was musty through and through and it was overwhelmingly depressing.
"Yes," said Davan. "You could be useful to us."
"In what way?"
"You talked to a young man named Yugo Amaryl."
"Yes, I did."
"Amaryl tells me that you can predict the future."
Seldon sighed heavily. He was tired of standing in this empty room. Davan was sitting on a cushion and there were other cushions available, but they did not look clean. Nor did he wish to lean against the mildew-streaked wall.
He said, "Either you misunderstood Amaryl or Amaryl misunderstood me. What I have done is to prove that it is possible to choose starting conditions from which historical forecasting does not descend into chaotic conditions, but can become predictable within limits. However, what those starting conditions might be I do not know, nor am I sure that those conditions can be found by any one person--or by any number of people--in a finite length of time. Do you understand me?"
"No."
Seldon sighed again. "Then let me try once more. It is possible to predict the future, but it may be impossible to find out how to take advantage of that possibility. Do you understand?"
Davan looked at Seldon darkly, then at Dors. "Then you cant predict the future."
"Now you have the point, Master Davan."
"Just call me Davan. But you may be able to learn to predict the future someday."
"That is conceivable."
"Then thats why the Empire wants you."
"No," Seldon raised his finger didactically. "Its my idea that that is why the Empire is not making an overwhelming effort to get me. They might like to have me if I can be picked up without trouble, but they know that right now I know nothing and that it is therefore not worth upsetting the delicate peace of Trantor by interfering with the local rights of this sector or that. Thats the reason I can move about under my own name with reasonable security."
For a moment, Davan buried his head in his hands and muttered, "This is madness." Then he looked up wearily and said to Dors, "Are you Master Seldons wife?"
Dors said calmly, "I am his friend and protector."
"How well do you know him?"
"We have been together for some months."
"No more?"
"No more."
"Would it be your opinion he is speaking the truth?"
"I know he is, but what reason would you have to trust me if you do not trust him? If Hari is, for some reason, lying to you, might I not be lying to you equally in order to support him?"
Davan looked from one to the other helplessly. Then he said, "Would you, in any case, help us?"
"Who are us and in what way do you need help?"
Davan said, "You see the situation here in Dahl. We are oppressed. You must know that and, from your treatment of Yugo Amaryl, I cannot believe you lack sympathy for us."
"We are fully sympathetic."
"And you must know the source of the oppression."
"You are going to tell me that its the Imperial government, I suppose, and I dare say it plays its part. On the other hand, I notice that there is a middle class in Dahl that despises the heatsinkers and a criminal class that terrorizes the rest of the sector."
Davans lips tightened, but he remained unmoved. "Quite true. Quite true. But the Empire encourages it as a matter of principle. Dahl has the potential for making serious trouble. If the heatsinkers should go on strike, Trantor would experience a severe energy shortage almost at once ... with all that that implies. However, Dahls own upper classes will spend money to hire the hoodlums of Billibotton--and of other places--to fight the heatsinkers and break the strike. It has happened before. The Empire allows some Dahlites to prosper--comparatively--in order to convert them into Imperialist lackeys, while it refuses to enforce the arms-control laws effectively enough to weaken the criminal element.
"The Imperial government does this everywhere--and not in Dahl alone. They cant exert force to impose their will, as in the old days when they ruled with brutal directness. Nowadays, Trantor has grown so complex and so easily disturbed that the Imperial forces must keep their hands off--"
"A form of degeneration," said Seldon, remembering Hummins complaints.
"What?" said Davan.
"Nothing," said Seldon. "Go on."
"The Imperial forces must keep their hands off, but they find that they can do much even so. Each sector is encouraged to be suspicious of its neighbors. Within each sector, economic and social classes are encouraged to wage a kind of war with each other. The result is that all over Trantor it is impossible for the people to take united action. Everywhere, the people would rather fight each other than make a common stand against the central tyranny and the Empire rules without having to exert force."
"And what," said Dors, "do you think can be done about it?"
"Ive been trying for years to build a feeling of solidarity among the peoples of Trantor."
"I can only suppose," said Seldon dryly, "that you are finding this an impossibly difficult and largely thankless task."
"You suppose correctly," said Davan, "but the party is growing stronger. Many of our knifers are coming to the realization that knives are best when they are not used on each other. Those who attacked you in the corridors of Billibotton are examples of the unconverted. However, those who support you now, who are ready to defend you against the agent you thought was a newsman, are my people. I live here among them. It is not an attractive way of life, but I am safe here. We have adherents in neighboring sectors and we spread daily."
"But where do we come in?" asked Dors.
"For one thing," said Davan, "both of you are Outworlders, scholars. We need people like you among our leaders. Our greatest strength is drawn from the poor and the uneducated because they suffer the most, but they can lead the least. A person like one of you two is worth a hundred of them."
"Thats an odd estimate from someone who wishes to rescue the oppressed," said Seldon.
"I dont mean as people," said Davan hastily. "I mean as far as leadership is concerned. The party must have among its leaders men and women of intellectual power."
"People like us, you mean, are needed to give your party a veneer of respectability."
Davan said, "You can always put something noble in a sneering fashion if you try. But you, Master Seldon, are more than respectable, more than intellectual. Even if you wont admit to being able to penetrate the mists of the future--"
"Please, Davan," said Seldon, "dont be poetic and dont use the conditional. Its not a matter of admitting. I cant foresee the future. Those are not mists that block the view but chrome steel barriers."
"Let me finish. Even if you cant actually predict with--what do you call it?--psychohistorical accuracy, youve studied history and you may have a certain intuitive feeling for consequences. Now, isnt that so?"
Seldon shook his head. "I may have a certain intuitive understanding for mathematical likelihood, but how far I can translate that into anything of historical significance is quite uncertain. Actually, I have not studied history. I wish I had. I feel the loss keenly."
Dors said evenly, "I am the historian, Davan, and I can say a few things if you wish."
"Please do," said Davan, making it half a courtesy, half a challenge.
"For one thing, there have been many revolutions in Galactic history that have overthrown tyrannies, sometimes on individual planets, sometimes in groups of them, occasionally in the Empire itself or in the pre-Imperial regional governments. Often, this has only meant a change in tyranny. In other words, one ruling class is replaced by another--sometimes by one that is more efficient and therefore still more capable of maintaining itself--while the poor and downtrodden remain poor and downtrodden or become even worse off."
Davan, listening intently, said, "Im aware of that. We all are. Perhaps we can learn from the past and know better what to avoid. Besides, the tyranny that now exists is actual. That which may exist in the future is merely potential. If we are always to draw back from change with the thought that the change may be for the worse, then there is no hope at all of ever escaping injustice."
Dors said, "A second point you must remember is that even if you have right on your side, even if justice thunders condemnation, it is usually the tyranny in existence that has the balance of force on its side. There is nothing your knife handlers can do in the way of rioting and demonstrating that will have any permanent effect as long as, in the extremity, there is an army equipped with kinetic, chemical, and neurological weapons that is willing to use them against your people. You can get all the downtrodden and even all the respectables on your side, but you must somehow win over the security forces and the Imperial army or at least seriously weaken their loyalty to the rulers."
Davan said, "Trantor is a multigovernmental world. Each sector has its own rulers and some of them are themselves anti-Imperial. If we can have a strong sector on our side, that would change the situation, would it not? We would then not be merely ragamuffins fighting with knives and stones."
"Does that mean you do have a strong sector on your side or merely that it is your ambition to have one?"
Davan was silent.
Dors said, "I shall assume that you are thinking of the Mayor of Wye. If the Mayor is in the mood to make use of popular discontent as a way of improving the chance of toppling the Emperor, doesnt it strike you that the end the Mayor would have in view would be that of succeeding to the Imperial throne? Why should the Mayor risk his present not-inconsiderable position for anything less? Merely for the blessings of justice and the decent treatment of people, concerning whom he can have little interest?"
"You mean," said Davan, "that any powerful leader who is willing to help us may then betray us."
"It is a situation that is all too common in Galactic history."
"If we are ready for that, might we not betray him?"
"You mean, make use of him and then, at some crucial moment, subvert the leader of his forces--or a leader, at any rate--and have him assassinated?"
"Not perhaps exactly like that, but some way of getting rid of him might exist if that should prove necessary."
"Then we have a revolutionary movement in which the principal players must be ready to betray each other, with each simply waiting for the opportunity. It sounds like a recipe for chaos."
"You will not help us, then?" said Davan.
Seldon, who had been listening to the exchange between Davan and Dors with a puzzled frown on his face, said, "We cant put it that simply. We would like to help you. We are on your side. It seems to me that no sane man wants to uphold an Imperial system that maintains itself by fostering mutual hatred and suspicions. Even when it seems to work, it can only be described as meta-stable; that is, as too apt to fall into instability in one direction or another. But the question is: How can we help? If I had psychohistory, if I could tell what is most likely to happen, or if I could tell what action of a number of alternative possibilities is most likely to bring on an apparently happy consequence, then I would put my abilities at your disposal.--But I dont have it. I can help you best by trying to develop psychohistory."
"And how long will that take?"
Seldon shrugged. "I cannot say."
"How can you ask us to wait indefinitely?"
"What alternative do I have, since I am useless to you as I am? But I will say this: I have until very recently been quite convinced that the development of psychohistory was absolutely impossible. Now I am not so certain of that."
"You mean you have a solution in mind?"
"No, merely an intuitive feeling that a solution might be possible. I have not been able to pin down what has occurred to make me have that feeling. It may be an illusion, but I am trying. Let me continue to try.--Perhaps [then well] meet again."
"Or perhaps," said Davan, "if you return to where you are now staying, you will eventually find yourself in an Imperial trap. You may think that the Empire will leave you alone while you struggle with psychohistory, but I am certain the Emperor and his toady Demerzel are in no mood to wait forever, any more than I am."
"It will do them no good to hasten," said Seldon calmly, "since I am not on their side, as I am on yours.--Come, Dors."
They turned and left Davan, sitting alone in his squalid room, and found Raych waiting for them outside.

第七十五章
　　在一间废弃的快餐店后面——很后面——一个房间里，他们见到那位自称达凡的男子。
芮奇一路带领他们来到此地，再度显示他对脐眼的巷道熟悉无比，就像赫利肯的鼹鼠进了洞穴一样，半路上，铎丝•凡纳比里的警觉首先显现出来。她突然停下脚步，说道：“回来，芮奇。我们究竟要走到哪儿去？”
“去找达凡，”芮奇看来有些火大，“我告诉过你。”
“但这是个荒废的地区，没有任何人住在这里。”铎丝带着明显的嫌恶环顾四周，周遭环境毫无生气，所有的照明板不是暗淡无光，就是只能发出晦暗的光芒。
“达凡就喜欢这样。”芮奇说，“他总是搬来搬去，这里住住，那里住住。你知道……搬来搬去。”
“为什么？”钎丝追问。
“这样比较安全，大姐。”
“躲什么人？”
“躲政府。”
“政府为什么要抓达凡？”
“我不知。这样吧，大姐，我告诉你他在哪里，再告诉你怎么走，然后你们自己去——如果你们不要我带路。”
谢顿说：“不，芮奇，我十分确定我们没有你就会迷路。事实上，你最好等在外面，我们谈完之后你好带我们回来。”
芮奇立刻说：“我会有什么好处？你指望我肚子饿了，还在附近晃来晃去？”
“如果你在附近晃来晃去，晃到肚子饿了，芮奇，我会请你吃一顿丰盛的晚餐，随便你喜欢吃什么。”
“你现在这么说，先生。我又怎么知道是真是假？”
铎丝的手快如闪电，瞬间便拔刀出鞘。“你不是在说我们说谎吧，是不是，芮奇？”
芮奇的双眼睁得老大，他似乎未被这个威胁吓到。他说：“嘿，我没看到，再来一次。”
“事后我会再来一次——假如你还在这里。否则的话，”锋丝以凶狠的耳光瞪着他，“我们会把你揪出来。”
“喔，大姐，得了吧。”芮奇说，“你们不会把我揪出来，你们不是那种人。但我会待在这里，”他摆了个姿势，“我向你们保证。”
然后他就领着两人默默前进，样空旷的回廊中，他们的脚步声显得分外空洞。
他们进入那个房间之后，达凡立刻抬起头来。当他看到芮奇后，凶狂的表情随即转趋柔和，并朝另外两人很快做了一个质问的手势。
芮奇说：“两位哥儿们来啦。”说完他咧嘴一笑，便径自离去。
谢顿说：“我是哈里•谢顿，这位年轻小姐是铎丝•凡纳比里。”
他以好奇的眼光打量达凡。达凡的皮肤黝黑，有着达尔男性独特的粗黑八字胡，但是除此之外，他还蓄着短短的络腮胡。在谢顿见过的达尔男子中，他是第一个不曾仔细刮脸的人。即使是脐眼的那些土霸，他们的脸颊与下巴也是光溜溜的。
谢顿说：“请教你的名字，阁下？”
“达凡。芮奇一定告诉过你。”
“你的姓氏呢？”
“我就叫达凡。你们来这里时曾被跟踪吗，谢顿老爷？”
“不，我确定没有。如果我们遭到跟踪，我相信那些人逃不过芮奇的耳朵和眼睛。即使他未曾察觉，凡纳比里夫人也会发现。”
铎丝微微一笑：“你对我真有信心，哈里。”
“越来越强。”他意味深长地说。
达凡不安地挪动了一下。“但你们已经被发现了。”
“被发现？”
“是的，我听说了这个所谓的新闻记者。”
“那么快？”谢顿看来有点惊讶，“但我以为他真是一名记者……而且并无恶意。是芮奇建议我们叫他帝国特务的，这是个好主意。周围的群众立刻变得凶恶，我们就这样摆脱了他。”
“不，”达凡说，“你没有冤枉他。我的手下认识这个人，他的确为帝国工作。可是你们的行事方式和我不同，你们不用假名，也不经常更换住处。你们用自己的真名行动，并未试图长期藏匿地下。你是哈里•谢顿，一位数学家。”
“没错，我就是。”谢顿说，“我为什么要取个假名字？”
“帝国正在缉捕你，对不对？”
谢顿耸了耸肩：“我所待的那些地方，都是帝国势力不及之处。”
“那仅是就公然行动而言，但帝国不一定非公然行动不可。我奉劝你们销声匿迹……真正消失。”
“就像你……如你所说。”谢顿一面说，一面带着些许嫌恶四下张望。这个房间与他刚才经过的那些回廊一样死气沉沉，到处充满霉味，而且有一种无比阴郁的气氛。
“是的，”达凡说，“你可能对我们有用。”
“如何有用？”
“你跟一位名叫雨果•阿马瑞尔的人谈过话。”
“是的，没错。”
“阿马瑞尔告诉我说你能预测未来。”
谢顿重重叹了一声，他厌倦了站在这个空洞的虏问坐。达儿坐在一个坐垫上，室内还有其他的坐垫，但它们看来并不干净。此外，他也不希望靠在满是霉斑的墙壁上。
他说：“要不是你误会了阿马瑞尔，就是阿马瑞尔误会了我。我所做到的，只是证明有可能选择一组起始条件，从这组条件出发，历史预测不会陷入混沌条件，且能在某个限度内具有可预测性。然而，那组起始条件应该是什么，我根本不知道；我也不确定那些条件是否可在有限时间内，能由任何一个人，或是任何数目的一群人找出来。你了解我的话吗？”
“不了解。”
谢顿又叹了一声，“那么让我再试一次。预测未来是可能的，但或许不可能找出如何利用这个可能件。你了解了吗？”
达儿以阴郁的眼神望向谢顿，然后又望向铎丝：“所以你无法预测未来。”
“现在你总算掌握重点了，达凡老爷。”
“叫我达凡就行。但是也许有一天，你能学到如何预测未来。”
“那倒是可以想象的。”
“所以说，那就是帝国要你的原因。”
“不，”谢顿举起一根手指，像是要说教，“在我看来，这反而是帝国未倾全力捉拿我的原因。若能毫不费力就抓到我，他们或许会想将我带走，但是他们明白，此时此刻我什么也不知道，因此不值得为了我而干预某区的地方政权，以致搅乱川陀上微妙而脆弱的和平。这就是我还能以本名活动，而不至有重大安全威胁的原因。”
一时之间，达凡将头埋在双掌之中，喃喃自语道：“真是愚蠢。”
然后他满面倦容地抬起头来，对铎丝说：“你是谢顿老爷的妻子吗？”
铎丝平静地答道：“我是他的朋友兼保护者。”
“你对他的认识有多深？”
“我们在一起几个月了。”
“如此而已？”
“如此而已。”
“依你的见解，他说的都是实话吗？”
“我知道他说的是实话，但你若是不信任他，又有什么理由该信任我？假如因为某种理由，哈里对你说了谎话，难道我不会为了支持他，而同样对你说谎吗？”
达凡无助地轮流望向对面两人，又说：“无论如何，你们愿意帮助我们吗？”
“‘我们’是指谁？你们又需要什么样的帮助？”
达凡说：“你看到了达尔这里的情形，我们受到压迫，这点你一定知道。根据你对待雨果•阿马瑞尔的方式，我无法相信你对我们毫无同情。”
“我们万分同情。”
“你也一定知道压迫的来源。”
“你是想告诉我就是帝国政府，对吧？我这么想，而我敢说它的确是主要的压迫来源。另一方面，我注意到达尔有个轻视热闾工的中等阶级，还有个令本区各处陷入恐怖的罪犯阶级。”
达儿的嘴唇收紧，但他依旧保持镇定。“正确，相当正确，但原则上帝国鼓励这种趋势。达尔具有引发重大危机的潜力，如果热闾工进行罢工，川陀几乎立刻会遭到严重的能源短缺……以及因此而来的一切灾难。然而，达尔本身的上层阶级会花钱雇用脐眼或其他地方的流氓，去教训那些热闾工，让罢工半途夭折，这种事以前发生过。帝国允许某些达尔人飞黄腾达——当然是相对而言——好将他们收买为帝国主义的走狗；然而，它却拒绝厉行削弱犯罪分子的武器管制法令：帝国政府在每个地方都这样做，并非只在达尔如此。过去那种以凶残手段直接统治的模式已无法派上用场，他们不能利用武力贯彻他们的意志。如今，川陀已经变得如此复杂，如此容易动摇，帝国武力必须保持一定距离——”
“衰微的一种体现。”谢顿想起夫铭的牢骚，随口说了出来。
“什么？”达凡问道。
“没什么，”谢顿说，“请继续。”
“帝国武力必须保持一定距离，不过他们发现即使如此，他们仍旧能动许多手脚。例如鼓励每个区猜疑近邻；而在每一区中，又鼓励各个经济和社会阶级互相进行某种斗争。结果使得川陀每个角落的人民，都不可能采取团结一致的行动。不论在任何地方，人们宁愿互相斗争，也不想对中央极权的专制采取共同市场。这样一来，帝国不费一兵一卒即可统治川陀。”
“在你看来，”铎丝说，“能做些什么来改善这一点？”
“我努力了许多年，试图在川陀人民之间建立一种团结感。”
“我只能这么猜想，”谢顿冷淡地说，“你发现这个工作困难到近乎不可能，而且大多时候吃力不讨好。”
“你的猜想完全正确，”达凡说，“但这个党正在茁壮成长。我们的许多刀客已经渐渐了解，刀子的最佳用途不是用来彼此砍杀。上次在脐眼的回廊中攻击你们的人，是那些不知悔改的例子。然而，现在支持你的邡些人，那些愿意保护你，为你对付那个特务记者的人，他们都是我的人马。我和他们一起住在这里，这并非一种迷人的生活方式，但我在此安全无虞。我们在邻区也有志同道合者，我们的势力正在一天天扩展。”
“可是我们又扮演什么角色呢？”铎丝问道。
“首先，”达凡说，“你们两位都是外星人士，都是学者，我们的领导群需要像你们这样的人。我们最大的力量源自贫困、未受教育的群众，因为他们受的苦难最大，但是他们的领导能力也最差。像你们两位这样的人，一个就抵得上他们一百个。”
“对一位以解救被压迫者为目标的人而言，这是个奇特的估算。”谢顿说。
“我的意思不是指人，”达儿连忙说，“我是仅就领导才能而论。在这个党的领导者中，一定要包括具有知识力量的男女。”
“你的意思是，需要像我们这样的人，好让你的党虚有值得尊敬的外表。”
达凡说：“只要有意，某件高贵的举动总是能被说成一文不值。可是你，谢顿老爷，则不只是值得尊敬，不只是拥有知识，即使你不承认自己有能力看穿未来的迷雾……”
“拜托，达凡，”谢顿说，“别用诗意的语言，也请你别用条件句。这并非承认与否的问题，我实在无法预见未来。遮挡视线的可不是烟雾，而是铬钢制成的壁垒。”
“让我说完。即使你不能以——你管它叫什么来着？喔，心理史学的准确度真正预测未来，但你曾研究过历史，对于事件的结果或许有某种程度的直觉。啊，是不是这样？”
谢顿摇了摇头：“对于数学上的可能性，我或许有些直觉式的了解，但我能将它转换成具有多少史学重要性的东西，答案则相当不确定。事实上，我并未研究过历史。我希望自己曾下过工夫，为此我极为遗憾。”
铎丝以平稳的口吻说：“我是个历史学家，达凡。你要是希望的话，我可以说几句话。”
“请讲。”达凡的口气听来半是客气，半带挑衅。
“首先，在银河历史上，曾发生过许多次推翻专制的革命，有时是在个别的行星，有时是一群行星，偶尔也发生于帝国本身，或是前帝国时代的地方政府中。往往，这只意味着专制的更替。换句话说，一个统治阶级被另一个取代——有时后者比前者更有效率，因此更有能力维系自身的统治。原本贫苦的、受压迫的百姓，依然是贫苦而受压迫的一群，或是处境变得更糟。”
一直专心聆听的达凡说道：“我晓得这种事，我们全都晓得。说不定我们能从过去学到教训，更加了解该如何避免。此外，如今存在的专制是真实的，那个或许存在于未来的却只是潜在的可能。如果我们总是不敢接受改变，认为也许会越变越糟，那根本没希望免除任何的不公不义。”
铎丝说：“第二点你必须记住的，就是即使公理在你这边，即使正义之神发出怒吼与谴责，然而，通常拥有绝对武力优势的都是那个专制政权。只要在情况危急之际，有一支配备动能、化学能和神经武器的军队，愿意用它们对付你的人马，那么你的刀客利用暴动和示威的手段，根本无法造成任何永久性影响。你能使所有受压迫者站在你这边，甚至能吸引所有有头有脸的人，可是你还得设法笼络安全部队和帝国的军队，或者至少得大幅削弱他们肘统治者的忠诚。”
达凡说：“川陀是个多政府的世界，各区都有自身的统治者，他们其中有些也是反帝人士。如果我们让一个强区加入我们这边，那就会改变这种情况，对不对？那个时候，我们就不只是一群手持刀子、石头的褴褛杂牌军。”
“你的意思是，真有一个强区站在你那边，或者只是你有企图拉拢一个？”
达凡沉默不语。
铎丝又说：“我猜你心目中的对象是卫荷区长。如果那位区长有心利用普遍的不满，来增加推翻皇上的成功机会，难道你不曾想到，他所期待的结局，将是由他自己继任皇位。区长现在的地位并非毫不值钱，除了皇位之外，还有什么值得他冒险的？难道只是为了正义的美名，为了帮他并不关心的人民争取良好的待遇？”
“你的意思是，”达凡说道，“任何愿意帮助我们的强权领袖，到时都可能背叛我们？”
“在银河历史上，这种情形屡见不鲜。”
“如果我们有所准备，难道我们不能背叛他吗？”
“你的意思是先利用他，然后在某个关键时刻，策反他的军队领袖——或者，至少是其中之一——将他暗杀？”
“也许不是完全像这样，但若证明有必要的话，总该有什么办法将他除去。”
“那我们就有了这样一场革命行动——其中的主要角色得随时准备彼此背叛，每个人都只是在等待机会。这听来像是制造混乱的配方。”
“这么说，你们不会帮助我们？”达凡说。
谢顿一直皱着眉头，倾听达凡与铎丝的对话，仿佛十分为难。这时他说：“我们不能把话说得那么简单。我们愿意帮助你们，我们站在你们这边。在我看来，没有任何心智健全的人，会想支持一个借着培养互恨、互疑来维持自身的帝制系统。即使现在似乎行得通，它也只能算是暂时稳定状态；也就是说，它太容易向某个方向倾倒，跌入不稳定的状态。不过问题是：我们怎样才能帮忙？假使我掌握了心理史学，假使我能判断什么是最可能发生的，或者，假使我能判断在数个可供选择的行动中，哪个最有可能带来圆满的结局，那么我会听任你支配我的能力——可是我并未掌握。我能帮助你的最好方式，就是试着把心理史学建立起来。”
“这要花多久时间？”
谢顿耸了耸肩：“我不敢说。”
“你怎能让我们无限期等下去？”
“既然我现在对你毫无用处，我还有什么其他选择？不过可以告诉你，不久之前我还一直深信建立心理史学是绝不可能的事，如今我已不再如此确定。”
“你的意思是说。你心中已有解决之道？”
“不，只是有一个直觉，感到某个解决之道或许是可能的。我还未能确知究竟是什么使我有那种感觉。它也许是一种幻觉，但我正在尝试寻找真相。让我继续尝试——说不定我们会再见面。”
“或者说不定——”达凡说，“你回到现在的栖身之地，到头来却发现自己置身于帝国的陷阱中。你也许认为在你和心理史学奋斗时，帝国会暂且放你一马。但我确定皇上和他的马屁精丹莫茨尔，必定和我一样不想永远等下去。”
“轻举妄动对他们没好处，”谢顿冷静地说，“因为我并非站在他们那边，我是站在你们这边的。来吧，铎丝。”
他们转身离去，留下达凡一人独自坐在肮脏的斗室。才出门，他们便发现芮奇还等在外头。
Chapter 76
Raych was eating, licking his fingers, and crumpling the bag in which the food--whatever it was--had been. A strong smell of onions pervaded the air--different somehow, yeast-based perhaps.
Dors, retreating a little from the odor, said, "Where did you get the food from, Raych?"
"Davans guys. They brought it to me. Davans okay."
"Then we dont have to buy you dinner, do we?" said Seldon, conscious of his own empty stomach.
"Ya owe me somethin," said Raych, looking greedily in Dorss direction. "How about the ladys knife? One of em."
"No knife," said Dors. "You get us back safely and Ill give you five credits."
"Cant get no knife for five credits," grumbled Raych.
"Youre not getting anything but five credits," said Dors.
"Youre a lousy dame, lady," said Raych.
"Im a lousy dame with a quick knife, Raych, so get moving."
"All right. Dont get all perspired." Raych waved his hand. "This way."
It was back through the empty corridors, but this time Dors, looking this way and that, stopped. "Hold on, Raych. Were being followed."
Raych looked exasperated. "Ya aint supposed to hear em."
Seldon said, bending his head to one side, "I dont hear anything."
"I do," said Dors. "Now, Raych, I dont want any fooling around. You tell me right now whats going on or Ill rap your head so that you wont see straight for a week. I mean it."
Raych held up one arm defensively. "You try it, you lousy dame. You try it. Its Davans guys. Theyre just taking care of us, in case any knifers come along."
"Davans guys?"
"Yeah. Theyre goin along the service corridors."
Dorss right hand shot out and seized Raych by the scruff of his upper garment. She lifted and he dangled, shouting, "Hey, lady. Hey!"
Seldon said, "Dors! Dont be hard on him."
"Ill be harder still if I think hes lying. Youre my charge, Hari, not he."
"Im not lyin," said Raych, struggling. "Im not."
"Im sure he isnt," said Seldon.
"Well, well see. Raych, tell them to come out where we can see them." She let him drop and dusted her hands.
"Youre some kind of nut, lady," said Raych aggrievedly. Then he raised his voice. "Yay, Davan! Come out here, some of ya guys!"
There was a wait and then, from an unlit opening along the corridor, two dark-mustached men came out, one with a scar running the length of his cheek. Each held the sheath of a knife in his hand, blade withdrawn.
"How many more of you are there?" asked Dors harshly.
"A few," said one of the newcomers. "Orders. Were guarding you. Davan wants you safe."
"Thank you. Try to be even quieter. Raych, keep on moving."
Raych said sulkily, "Ya roughed me up when I was telling the truth."
"Youre right," said Dors. "At least, I think youre right ... and I apologize."
"Im not sure I should accept," said Raych, trying to stand tall. "But awright, just this once." He moved on.
When they reached the walkway, the unseen corps of guards vanished. At least, even Dorss keen ears could hear them no more. By now, though, they were moving into the respectable part of the sector.
Dors said thoughtfully, "I dont think we have clothes that would fit you, Raych."
Raych said, "Why do ya want clothes to fit me, Missus?" (Respectability seemed to invade Raych once they were out of the corridors.) "I got clothes."
"I thought youd like to come into our place and take a bath."
Raych said, "What for? Ill wash one o these days. And Ill put on my other shirt." He looked up at Dors shrewdly. "Youre sorry ya roughed me up. Right? Ya tryin to make up?"
Dors smiled. "Yes. Sort of."
Raych waved a hand in lordly fashion. "Thats all right. Ya didnt hurt. Listen. Youre strong for a lady. Ya lifted me up like I was nothin."
"I was annoyed, Raych. I have to be concerned about Master Seldon."
"Ya sort of his bodyguard?" Raych looked at Seldon inquiringly. "Ya got a lady for a bodyguard?"
"I cant help it," said Seldon smiling wryly. "She insists. And she certainly knows her job."
Dors said, "Think again, Raych. Are you sure you wont have a bath? A nice warm bath."
Raych said, "I got no chance. Ya think that lady is gonna let me in the house again?"
Dors looked up and saw Casilia Tisalver outside the front door of the apartment complex, staring first at the Outworld woman and then at the slum-bred boy. It would have been impossible to tell in which case her expression was angrier.
Raych said, "Well, so long, Mister and Missus. I dont know if shell let either of ya in the house." He placed his hands in his pocket and swaggered off in a fine affectation of carefree indifference.
Seldon said, "Good evening, Mistress Tisalver. Its rather late, isnt it?"
"Its very late," she replied. "There was a near riot today outside this very complex because of that newsman you pushed the street vermin at."
"We didnt push anyone on anyone," said Dors.
"I was there," said Mistress Tisalver intransigently. "I saw it." She stepped aside to let them enter, but delayed long enough to make her reluctance quite plain.
"She acts as though that was the last straw," said Dors as she and Seldon made their way up to their rooms.
"So? What can she do about it?" asked Seldon.
"I wonder," said Dors.
Officers
RAYCH-- ... According to Hari Seldon, the original meeting with Raych was entirely accidental. He was simply a gutter urchin from whom Seldon had asked directions. But his life, from that moment on, continued to be intertwined with that of the great mathematician until ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第七十六章
　　芮奇正在吃东西，他一面舔着手指，一面将原本不知装着什么食物的袋子捏皱。一种强烈的洋葱气味弥漫在空气中——不过这并不是真的洋葱，也许是发自酵母制成的食物。
铎丝被熏得稍微退了一步：“你的食物是从哪里来的，芮奇？”
“达凡的哥儿们，他们拿给我的，达凡不坏。”
“那我们不必请你吃晚饭了，对不对？”谢顿说完之后，察觉自己的肚子倒是空了。
“你们欠我一点东西，”芮奇一面说，一面贪婪地望向铎丝，“这位大姐的刀子怎么样？分我一把。”
“刀子不行，”铎丝说，“你带我们平安回去，我就给你五个信用点。”
“五个信用点买不到刀子。”芮奇抱怨道。
“除了五个信用点之外，你什么也休想得到。”铎丝说。
“你是个差幼的娘儿们，大姐。”芮奇说。
“我是个拥有快刀的差劲娘儿们，芮奇，所以赶紧走吧。”
“好吧，别太激动。”芮奇挥了挥手，“这边走。”
他们又来到空旷的回廊。不过这一次，铎丝东张西望一番后停下了脚步。“等等，芮奇，有人跟踪我们。”
芮奇看来勃然大怒：“你怎么可能听到他们！”
谢顿将头弯向一侧，说道：“我什么也听不到。”
“我听到了，”铎丝说，“好啦，芮奇，我不希望你耍什么花样。立刻告诉我是怎么回事，否则我就要敲你的头，让你整整一周没法抬头。我是说真的。”
“你试试看，你这个差劲的娘儿们，你试试看。”芮奇举起手臂防御，“那是达凡的哥儿们，他们只是在照应我们，以防路上遇到任何刀客。”
“达凡的哥儿们？”
“是啊，他们沿着工用回廊前进。”
铎丝猛然伸出右手，抓住芮奇颈背处的衣领。她将手一举，他就悬吊在半空中，慌忙喊道：“嘿，大姐。嘿！”
谢顿说：“不要！不要对他动粗。”
“如果我认为他是在说谎，我还会更加粗暴。我保护的对象是你，哈里，不是他。”
“我没说谎，”芮奇拼命挣扎，“我没。”
“我确信他没有。”谢顿说。
“好吧，我们等着瞧。芮奇，叫他们走出来，走到我们看得见的地方。”她松手让他落下，拍了拍手上的灰尘。
“你简直是个傻瓜，大姐。”芮奇愤愤不平地说，然后提高音量喊道：“喂，达凡！你们随便几个哥儿们，走出来！”
等了一会儿，从回廊中一个光线不及的出口处，走出两名留着黑色八字胡的男子，其中一个有一道横贯脸颊的疤。两人手中都握着一把刀鞘，刀刃是缩着的。
“你们还有多少人在那里？”铎丝厉声问道。
“有一些，”其中一人答道，“我们奉命保卫你们，达凡要你们安然无事。”
“谢谢你，试着更安静点。芮奇，继续走。”
芮奇悻悻地说：“我说实话的时候，你却教训我一顿。”
“你说得对，”铎丝说，“至少，我认为你说得对——我郑重道歉。”
“我不确定该不该接受，”芮奇试图抬头挺胸，说道，“不过算了，下次不可以。”说完他就继续前进。
当他们来到人行道后，那些隐匿的卫队便消失了。至少，就连铎丝敏锐的耳朵也无法听见他们的动静。不过，反正他们就要进入本区的高尚地段。
铎丝若有所指地说：“我想我们没有适合你的衣服，芮奇。”
芮奇说：“为什么要适合我的衣服，姑奶奶？我有衣服。”一旦他们走出那些回廊，芮奇似乎也懂得尊重了。
“我原本在想，你会喜欢到我们住的地方洗个澡。”
芮奇说：“为什么？过几天我会洗，然后我会穿上另一件短衫。”他机灵地抬头望向铎丝，“你为了教训我一顿感到抱歉，对吗？你试图补偿。”
铎丝微微一笑：“是的，可以这么说。”
芮奇以气派的动作挥了挥手：“没关系，你没弄痛我。听我说，以大姐来说你非常强壮，你举起我就像我是空气一样。”
“我当时心烦意乱，芮奇，我必须顾虑谢顿老爷。”
“你就像是他的保镖？”芮奇带着询问的神情望向谢顿，“你用个大姐当你的保镖？”
“我也没办法，”谢顿露出一抹苦笑，“她坚持如此，而且她确实很称职。”
铎丝说：“再次谢谢你，芮奇。你确定不要洗个澡吗？一个温暖舒适的澡。”
芮奇说：“我看没机会了。你以为那个大姐会让我再进那栋房子吗？”
铎丝抬起头来，看到卡西莉娅•堤沙佛正站在公寓群的前门外。她先盯着这个外星女子，然后望向那个贫民窟长大的男孩。从她的表情实在很难判断她对何者更愤怒些。
芮奇说：“好啦，告辞了，先生和姑奶奶。不晓得她会不会让你们进屋去。”他将双手放进口袋，装出一副毫不在乎的淡然模样，大摇大摆走开了。
谢顿说：“晚安，堤沙佛夫人。相当晚了，对吧？”
“非常晚了。”她答道，“今天在这个公寓群外，由于你驱使街头无赖对付那名记者，几乎发生一场暴动。”
“我们没有驱使任何人对付任何人。”铎丝说。
“我当时在场，”堤沙佛夫人毫不妥协地说，“我都看见了。”她故意挡在门口，好一会儿才心不甘情不愿地让他们进去。
“看她的反应，那仿佛超过了她忍耐的极限。”当两人走向各自的房间时，铎丝这么说。
“那又如何？她能怎么样？”谢顿问道。
“我在纳闷。”铎丝说。
Chapter 77
The next morning, dressed from the waist down, having washed and shaved, Seldon knocked on the door that led to Dorss adjoining room and said in a moderate voice, "Open the door, Dors."
She did. The short reddish-gold curls of her hair were still wet and she too was dressed only from the waist down.
Seldon stepped back in embarrassed alarm. Dors looked down at the swell of her breasts indifferently and wrapped a towel around her head. "What is it?" she asked.
Seldon said, looking off to his right, "I was going to ask you about Wye."
Dors said very naturally, "About why in connection with what? And for goodness sake, dont make me talk to your ear. Surely, youre not a virgin."
Seldon said in a hurt tone, "I was merely trying to be polite. If you dont mind, I certainly dont. And its not why about what. Im asking about the Wye Sector."
"Why do you want to know? Or, if you prefer: Why Wye?"
"Look, Dors, Im serious. Every once in a while, the Wye Sector is mentioned--the Mayor of Wye, actually. Hummin mentioned him, you did, Davan did. I dont know anything about either the sector or the Mayor."
"Im not a native Trantorian either, Hari. I know very little, but youre welcome to what I do know. Wye is near the south pole--quite large, very populous--"
"Very populous at the south pole?"
"Were not on Helicon, Hari. Or on Cinna either. This is Trantor. Everything is underground and underground at the poles or underground at the equator is pretty much the same. Of course, I imagine they keep their day-night arrangements rather extreme--long days in their summer, long nights in their winter--almost as it would be on the surface. The extremes are just affectation; theyre proud of being polar."
"But Upperside they must be cold, indeed."
"Oh yes. The Wye Upperside is snow and ice, but it doesnt lie as thickly there as you might think. If it did, it might crush the dome, but it doesnt and that is the basic reason for Wyes power."
She turned to her mirror, removed the towel from her head, and threw the dry-net over her hair, which, in a matter of five seconds, gave it a pleasant sheen. She said, "You have no idea how glad I am not to be wearing a skincap," as she put on the upper portion of her clothing.
"What has the ice layer to do with Wyes power?"
"Think about it. Forty billion people use a great deal of power and every calorie of it eventually degenerates into heat and has to be gotten rid of. Its piped to the poles, particularly to the south pole, which is the more developed of the two, and is discharged into space. It [melts] most of the ice in the process and Im sure that accounts for Trantors clouds and rains, no matter how much the meteorology boggins insist that things are more complicated than that."
"Does Wye make use of the power before discharging it?"
"They may, for all I know. I havent the slightest idea, by the way, as to the technology involved in discharging the heat, but Im talking about political power. If Dahl were to stop producing usable energy, that would certainly inconvenience Trantor, but there are other sectors that produce energy and can up their production and, of course, there is stored energy in one form or another. Eventually, Dahl would have to be dealt with, but there would be time. Wye, on the other hand--"
"Yes?"
"Well, Wye gets rid of at least 90 percent of all the heat developed on Trantor and there is no substitute. If Wye were to shut down its heat emission, the temperature would start going up all over Trantor."
"In Wye too."
"[Yes], but since Wye is at the south pole, it can arrange an influx of cold air. It wouldnt do much good, but Wye would last longer than the rest of Trantor. The point is, then, that Wye is a very touchy problem for the Emperor and the Mayor of Wye is--or at least can be--extremely powerful."
"And what kind of a person is the present Mayor of Wye?"
"That I dont know. What Ive occasionally heard would make it seem that he is very old and pretty much a recluse, but hard as a hypership hull and still cleverly maneuvering for power."
"Why, I wonder? If hes that old, he couldnt hold the power for long."
"Who knows, Hari? A lifelong obsession, I suppose. Or else its the game ... the maneuvering for power, without any real longing for the power itself. Probably if he had the power and took over Demerzels place or even the Imperial throne itself, he would feel disappointed because the game would be over. Of course he might, if he was still alive, begin the subsequent game of keeping power, which might be just as difficult and just as satisfying."
Seldon shook his head. "It strikes me that no one could possibly want to be Emperor."
"No sane person would, I [free], but the Imperial wish, as it is frequently called, is like a disease that, when caught, drives out sanity. And the closer you get to high office, the more likely you are to catch the disease. With each ensuing promotion--"
"The disease grows still more acute. Yes, I can see that. But it also seems to me that Trantor is so huge a world, so interlocking in its needs and so conflicting in its ambitions, that it makes up the major part of the inability of the Emperor to rule. Why doesnt he just leave Trantor and establish himself on some simpler world?"
Dors laughed. "You wouldnt ask that if you knew your history. Trantor is the Empire through thousands of years of custom. An Emperor who is not at the Imperial Palace is not the Emperor. He is a place, even more than a person." Seldon sank into silence, his face rigid, and after a while Dors asked, "Whats the matter, Hari?"
"Im thinking," he said in a muffled voice. "Ever since you told me that hand-on-thigh story, Ive had fugitive thoughts that--Now your remark about the Emperor being a place rather than a person seems to have struck a chord."
"What kind of chord?"
Seldon shook his head. "Im still thinking. I may be all wrong." His glance at Dors sharpened, his eyes coming into focus. "In any case, we ought to go down and have breakfast. Were late and I dont think Mistress Tisalver is in a good enough humor to have it brought in for us."
"You optimist," said Dors. "My own feeling is that shes not in a good enough humor to want us to stay--breakfast or not. She wants us out of here."
"That may be, but were paying her."
"Yes, but I suspect she hates us enough by now to scorn our credits."
"Perhaps her husband will feel a bit more affectionate concerning the rent."
"If he has a single word to say, Hari, the only person who would be more surprised than me to hear it would be Mistress Tisalver.--Very well, Im ready."
And they moved down the stairs to the Tisalver portion of the apartment to find the lady in question waiting for them with less than breakfast--and with considerably more too.

第七十七章
第十六部 警官
芮奇：……根据哈里•谢顿的说法，最初与芮奇相遇纯粹是偶然。他只是个贫民区的顽童，谢顿只是向他问路。但从那一刻起，他的人生就与那位大数学家纠缠在一起。
直到……
——《银河百科全书》


第七十七章
第二天早上，谢顿梳洗刮脸完毕，上半身还没套上衣服，就敲着通往隔壁铎丝房间的那扇门，以适度的音量说：“开门，铎丝。”
铎丝应声开门。她满头金里透红的卷曲短发还湿淋淋的，而她的上身同样完全赤裸。
谢顿在尴尬的震惊中忙向后退。铎丝毫不在意地低头看了看圆胀的乳房，拿条毛巾裹在头上。“什么事？”她问。
谢顿将头转向右侧，说道：“我想请教你卫荷的事。”
铎丝毫不忸怩地说：“为何怎么样？还有，看在老天的分上，别让我对着你的耳朵说话。不用说，你当然不是处男。”
谢顿以受挫的语调说：“我只是想表现像个君子。如果你不在意，我自然也不会。还有，我说的不是为何怎么样，我是在问你有关卫荷区的事。”
“为何你想知道？或者你喜欢这么说——为何要问卫荷？”
“听好，铎丝，我不是在开玩笑。每隔一阵子，卫荷区就会被人提起——事实上，是提起那个卫荷区长。夫铭提过他，你提过，达凡也提过。我却对这个区和这个区长都一无所知。”
“我也不是土生土长的川陀人，哈里。我知道得非常少，不过我很乐意和你分享我所知道的一切。卫荷接近南极——面积相当庞大，人口众多……”
“在南极还能人口众多？”
“我们不是在赫利肯，哈里，也不是在锡纳上。这里是川陀，万事万物都在地底，而两极的地底和赤道的地底几乎差不多。当然，我猜想他们会保持相当极端的昼夜分布——在他们的夏天白昼很长，而冬天则刚好相反，几乎和地表的情形一样。这种极端只是装模作样，事实上他们是以身居极地自豪。”
“可是他们的穹顶上一定很冷。”
“噢，没错。卫荷的穹顶上冰雪交加，可是冰层堆积得不如你想象中那么厚，——否则就可能压垮穹顶。冰层就是卫倚握有权力的基本原因。”
她转身面向镜子，将毛巾从头上取下，再将干发网罩在头上。不过五秒钟，她的头发便显出悦人的光泽。“你绝不知道，不必戴人皮帽令我多么高兴。”她边说边套上了上衣。
“冰层和卫荷的权力有什么关系？”
“想想看，四百亿居民每天使用大量能源，每一卡能量最终都会转化成热量，而且必须设法排除。这些热量全被输送到两极，尤其是较先开发的南极，然后排放到太空去。在这个过程中，它融化了大部分的冰。我确定这解释了川陀上空云雨的来源，不论那些气象学究如何坚持实际情形比这要复杂许多。”
“在将这些热量排放之前，卫荷有没有加以利用？”
“据我所知，也许有。顺便告诉你，关于排放热量的科技，我连最粗浅的概念都没有，但我所说的是政治权力。假使达尔停止生产可用的能源，固然会造成整个川陀的不便，可是还有其他能源生产区，它们能将产量提高——此外，还有以各种方式贮存的能源可以救急。只要有段缓冲时间，达尔的问题终究可以解决。反之，卫荷……”
“怎么样？”
“嗯，川陀上所产生的各种热量，至少百分之九十由卫荷负责排放，没有任何替代办法。假使卫荷将热量发射全部关闭，整个川陀的温度便会开始上升。”
“卫荷也会。”
“啊，可是既然卫荷位于南极，它就能设法导入冷空气。这当然没法解决问题，但却可以使卫荷比川陀其他各处撑得更久。所以说，卫荷是皇上一个非常棘手的问题，而卫荷区长是——至少可以是——极有权力的人。”《基地前奏》（下）-187.JPG.TXT“那么现任卫荷区长是个什么样的人？”
“这点我不清楚。根据我偶尔听来的传闻，他似乎非常老迈，而且几乎是个隐士，但他和超空间飞船的船身一样刚硬，而且仍在老谋深算地谋夺权力。”
“为什么，我不明白？如果他那么老了，就不可能再掌权多久了。”
“谁晓得，哈里？我想这是一种终身的沉迷吧。或者它是个游戏……只是为了谋夺权力，并非真正渴求权力本身。假如他真掌握到权力，取代了丹莫茨尔的位置，甚至自己登上皇位，说不定他反而会感到失望——因为这场游戏就要结束了。当然啦，要是那时他还活着，他或许会开始下一个游戏，那就是固守这个权力。这也许和前一个游戏同样困难，因而同样令人感到满足。”
谢顿摇了摇头：“这使我有一种感想，不可能有人想要当皇帝。”
“我同意——神智清醒的人都不会。但是这种通常所谓的‘皇帝梦’像一种疾病，一旦染上就会使人丧失神智。而你越接近高位，就越有可能染上这种疾病。随着一次又一次的晋升……”
“这种疾病就会变得更加无可救药。没错，我明白这点。但我还有另一个感想，川陀是如此庞大的世界，它的需求是如此牵一发而动全身，而其中的野心家彼此间冲突又如此剧烈，使它成为皇帝治下主要的不稳定因素。皇帝为什么不干脆离开川陀，定都在某个较单纯的世界？”
铎丝哈哈大笑：“假如你了解历史，就不会问这个问题。根据数千年来的惯例，川陀就等于帝国。一个皇帝若不在皇宫之中，他就不算是个皇帝。事实上，皇帝更像是个地方，而不像是个人。”
谢顿陷入沉默，面孔也变得刚毅。
过了一会儿，铎丝问道：“怎么回事？”
“我在寻思，”他含糊应道，“自从你告诉我那个毛手毛脚的故事之后，我就有一种飘忽的想法。现在你又提到皇帝比较像个地方，而不像一个人，似乎刚好引起共鸣。”
“什么样的共鸣？”
谢顿摇了摇头：“我仍在寻思，或许我全搞错了。”他瞪着铎丝的目光变得尖锐，视线重新聚焦。“无论如何，我们该下去吃早餐了。我们已经迟到啦，我想堤沙佛夫人没有那么好的心情，会帮我们把早餐端进来。”
“你是个乐天派，”铎丝说，“我自己的感觉是，她没有那么好的心情，会想让我们留下来——不论有没有早餐。她想要让我们离开这里。”
“或许如此，但我们让她有钱可赚。”
“没错，但我怀疑她现在恨我们入骨，根本不屑赚我们的信用点。”
“说不定她的丈夫会对房租比较难分难舍一点。”
“如果他敢说任何话，哈里，堤沙佛夫人绝对会比我更惊讶。很好，我准备好了。”
于是他们走下楼梯，来到堤沙佛一家在这栋公寓的活动范围，发现两人讨论的那位女士正等在那里——虽然没准备早餐，却准备了一个更大的惊奇。
Chapter 78
Casilia Tisalver stood ramrod straight with a tight smile on her round face and her dark eyes glinting. Her husband was leaning moodily against the wall. In the center of the room were two men who were standing stiffly upright, as though they had noticed the cushions on the floor but scorned them. Both had the dark crisp hair and the chick black mustache to be expected of Dahlites. Both were thin and both were dressed in dark clothes so nearly alike that they were surely uniforms. There was thin white piping up and over the shoulders and down the sides of the tubular trouser legs. Each had, on the right side of his chest, a rather dim Spaceship-and-Sun, the symbol of the Galactic Empire on every inhabited world of the Galaxy, with, in this case, a dark "D" in the center of the sun.
Seldon realized immediately that these were two members of the Dahlite security forces.
"Whats all this?" said Seldon sternly.
One of the men stepped forward. "I am Sector Officer Lanel Russ. This is my partner, Gebore Astinwald."
Both presented glittering identification holo-tabs. Seldon didnt bother looking at them. "What it is you want?"
Russ said calmly, "Are you Hari Seldon of Helicon?"
"I am."
"And are you Dors Venabili of Cinna, Mistress?"
"I am," said Dors.
"Im here to investigate a complaint that one Hari Seldon instigated a riot yesterday."
"I did no such thing," said Seldon.
"Our information is," said Russ, looking at the screen of a small computer pad, "that you accused a newsman of being an Imperial agent, thus instigating a riot against him."
Dors said, "It was I who said he was an Imperial agent, Officer. I had reason to think he was. It is surely no crime to express ones opinion. The Empire has freedom of speech."
"That does not cover an opinion deliberately advanced in order to instigate a riot."
"How can you say it was, Officer?"
At this point, Mistress Tisalver interposed in a shrill voice, "I can say it, Officer. She saw there was a crowd present, a crowd of gutter people who were just looking for trouble. She deliberately said he was an Imperial agent when she knew nothing of the sort and she shouted it to the crowd to stir them up. It was plain that she knew what she was doing."
"Casilia," said her husband pleadingly, but she cast one look at him and he said no more.
Russ turned to Mistress Tisalver. "Did you lodge the complaint, Mistress?"
"Yes. These two have been living here for a few days and theyve done nothing but make trouble. Theyve invited people of low reputation into my apartment, damaging my standing with my neighbors."
"Is it against the law, Officer," asked Seldon, "to invite clean, quiet citizens of Dahl into ones room? The two rooms upstairs are our rooms. We have rented them and they are paid for. Is it a crime to speak to Dahlites in Dahl, Officer?"
"No, it is not," said Russ. "That is not part of the complaint. What gave you reason, Mistress Venabili, to suppose the person you so accused was, in fact, an Imperial agent?"
Dors said, "He had a small brown mustache, from which I concluded he was not a Dahlite. I surmised he was an Imperial agent."
"You surmised? Your associate, Master Seldon, has no mustache at all. Do you surmise he is an Imperial agent?"
"In any case," said Seldon hastily, "there was no riot. We asked the crowd to take no action against the supposed newsman and Im sure they didnt."
"Youre sure, Master Seldon?" said Russ. "Our information is that you left immediately after making your accusation. How could you witness what happened after you left?"
"I couldnt," said Seldon, "but let me ask you--Is the man dead? Is the man hurt?"
"The man has been interviewed. He denies he is an Imperial agent and we have no information that he is. He also claims he was handled roughly."
"He may well be lying in both respects," said Seldon. "I would suggest a Psychic Probe."
"That cannot be done on the victim of a crime," said Russ. "The sector government is very firm on that. It might do if you two, as the criminals in this case, each underwent a Psychic Probe. Would you like us to do that?"
Seldon and Dors exchanged glances for a moment, then Seldon said, "No, of course not."
"Of course not," repeated Russ with just a tinge of sarcasm in his voice, "but youre ready enough to suggest it for someone else." The other officer, Astinwald, who had so far not said a word, smiled at this. Russ said, "We also have information that two days ago you engaged in a knife fight in Billibotton and badly hurt a Dahlite citizen named"--he struck a button on his computer pad and studied the new page on the screen--"Elgin Marron."
Dors said, "Does your information tell you how the fight started?"
"That is irrelevant at the moment, Mistress. Do you deny that the fight took place?"
"Of course we dont deny the fight took place," said Seldon hotly, "but we deny that we in any way instigated that. We were attacked. Mistress Venabili was seized by this Marron and it was clear he was attempting to rape her. What happened afterward was pure self-defense. Or does Dahl condone rape?"
Russ said with very little intonation in his voice, "You say you were attacked? By how many?"
"Ten men."
"And you alone--with a woman--defended yourself against ten men?"
"Mistress Venabili and I defended ourselves. Yes."
"How is it, then, that neither of you shows any damage whatever? Are either of you cut or bruised where it doesnt show right now?"
"No, Officer."
"How is it, then, that in the fight of one--plus a woman--against ten, you are in no way hurt, but that the complainant, Elgin Marron, has been hospitalized with wounds and will require a skin transplant on his upper lip?"
"We fought well," said Seldon grimly.
"Unbelievably well. What would you say if I told you that three men have testified that you and your friend attacked Marron, unprovoked?"
"I would say that it belies belief that we should. Im sure that Marron has a record as a brawler and knifeman. I tell you that there were ten there. Obviously, six refused to swear to a lie. Do the other three explain why they did not come to the help of their friend if they witnessed him under unprovoked attack and in danger of his life? It must be clear to you that they are lying."
"Do you suggest a Psychic Probe for them?"
"Yes. And before you ask, I still refuse to consider one for us."
Russ said, "We have also received information that yesterday, after leaving the scene of the riot, you consulted with one Davan, a known subversive who is wanted by the security police. Is that true?"
"Youll have to prove that without help from us," said Seldon. "Were not answering any further questions."
Russ put away his pad. "Im afraid I must ask you to come with us to headquarters for further interrogation."
"I dont think thats necessary, Officer," said Seldon. "We are Outworlders who have done nothing criminal. We have tried to avoid a newsman who was annoying us unduly, we tried to protect ourselves against rape and possible murder in a part of the sector known for criminal behavior, and weve spoken to various Dahlites. We see nothing there to warrant our further questioning. It would come under the heading of harassment."
"We make these decisions," said Russ. "Not you. Will you please come with us?"
"No, we will not," said Dors.
"Watch out!" cried out Mistress Tisalver. "Shes got two knives."
Officer Russ sighed and said, "Thank you, Mistress, but I know she does." He turned to Dors. "Do you know its a serious crime to carry a knife without a permit in this sector? Do you have a permit?"
"No, Officer, I dont."
"It was clearly with an illegal knife, then, that you assaulted Marron? Do you realize that that greatly increases the seriousness of the crime?"
"It was no crime, Officer," said Dors. "Understand that. Marron had a knife as well and no permit, I am certain."
"We have no evidence to that effect and while Marron has knife wounds, neither of you have any."
"Of course he had a knife, Officer. If you dont know that every man in Billibotton and most men elsewhere in Dahl carry knives for which they probably dont have permits, then youre the only man in Dahl who doesnt know. There are shops here wherever you turn that sell knives openly. Dont you know that?"
Russ said, "It doesnt matter what I know or dont know in this respect. Nor does it matter whether other people are breaking the law or how many of them do. All that matters at this moment is that Mistress Venabili is breaking the anti-knife law. I must ask you to give up those knives to me right now, Mistress, and the two of you must then accompany me to headquarters."
Dors said, "In that case, take my knives away from me."
Russ sighed. "You must not think, Mistress, that knives are all the weapons there are in Dahl or that I need engage you in a knife fight. Both my partner and I have blasters that will destroy you in a moment, before you can drop your hands to your knife hilt--however fast you are. We wont use a blaster, of course, because we are not here to kill you. However, each of us also has a neuronic whip, which we can use on you freely. I hope you wont ask for a demonstration. It wont kill you, do you permanent harm of any kind, or leave any marks--but the pain is excruciating. My partner is holding a neuronic whip on you right now. And here is mine.--Now, let us have your knives, Mistress Venabili."
There was a moments pause and then Seldon said, "Its no use, Dors. Give him your knives."
And at that moment, a frantic pounding sounded at the door and they all heard a voice raised in high-pitched expostulation.

第七十八章
　　卡西莉娅•堤沙佛直板板地站在那里，她的圆脸带着僵硬的笑容，一双黑眼珠闪闪发光。她的丈夫则闷闷不乐地倚在墙边。房间中央还有两个人，他们都站得笔直，仿佛早已注意到地板上的坐垫，却不屑坐在上面。
这两个人都有一头卷曲的黑发，以及达尔人必备的粗黑八字胡。两人都很瘦小，皆穿着一套黑色服装。那两件衣服极其相似，看来是一种制服，从肩头到管状裤腿的外侧都绣着细白的滚边。他们的右胸挂着一个不甚明显的“星舰与太阳”标志，在银河中每一个住人世界上，它所代表的都是银河帝国。而他们两人身上的标志，在太阳中央还有一个深色的“达”字。
谢顿立刻了解，这两人是达尔安全警察的成员。
“这是怎么回事？”谢顿以严厉的口气说。
其中一人向前走来。“我是区巡官拉涅尔•鲁斯；这是我的搭档，葛柏•艾斯汀伍德。”
两人都出示了亮晶晶的全息标签识别证。谢顿根本懒得看，只是问道：“你们想干什么？”
鲁斯以平静的口气说：“你是赫利肯的哈里•谢顿吗？”
“我就是。”
“而你是锡纳的铎丝•凡纳比里吗，夫人？”
“我就是。”铎丝答道。
“我来这里是要处理一件投诉案件，昨天有个哈里•谢顿煽起一桩暴动。”
“我没做那种事。”谢顿说。
“我们的情报指出，”鲁斯看了看一个小型计算机版的屏幕，“你指控一名记者是帝国特务，因此煽起一场暴动对付他。”
铎丝说：“说他是帝国特务的人是我，警官，我有理由这样认为。表达一个人的意见当然没有罪，帝国有言论自由。”
“那不包括为了煽起暴动故意提出的意见。”
“你怎能这样说，警官！”
这时，堤沙佛夫人以尖锐的声音插嘴道：“我能这样说，警官。当时她看到外面有一群人，一群从贫民区来的人，他们只是想找麻烦。她故意对群众喊话、煽动他们，说他是帝因特务，其实她根本不懂什么是特务。事实很明显，她知道自己在做什么。”
“卡西莉娅。”她的丈夫以恳求的语气唤她。她瞪了他一眼，后者随即沉默下来。
鲁斯转向堤沙佛夫人：“是你投诉的吗，夫人？”
“是的。这两人在这里住了好几天，除了惹麻烦什么也不干。他们邀请低级民众进我的公寓，破坏我在邻居心目中的地位。”
“邀请干净、平和的达尔公民进某人的房间，警官，”谢顿问道，“难道是违法的行为吗？楼上两个房间是我们的，我们已经租下，并且付了房租。在达尔境内和达尔人交谈也犯法吗，警官？”
“不，不是的。”鲁斯说，“那并非投诉的一部分。你究竟有什么理由，凡纳比里夫人，认为你指控的那个人确实是帝国特务？”
铎丝说：“他只有两小撇棕色胡须，我据此断定他不是达尔人，我推测他是一名帝国特务。”
“你推测？你的同伴——谢顿老爷，他根本没有胡子，你也推测他是一名帝国特务吗？”
“无论如何，”谢顿急忙说道，“根本没有暴动。我们要求群众别对那个所谓的记者采取任何行动，我确定他们没有那样做。”
“你确定，谢顿老爷？”鲁斯说，“根据我们的情报，你们做出指控后立刻离去。在你离去后，你怎能目睹发生了什么事？”
“我不能，”谢顿说，“但是容我请教一下——那人死了吗？还是受伤了？”
“那人曾接受约谈。他否认自己是帝国特务，我们也没有情报显示这点。他还声称曾经遭到虐待。”
“他很可能在两方面都撒了谎，”谢顿说，“我建议使用心灵探测器。”
“不能对案件的受害者那样做，”鲁斯说，“区政府对这点非常坚持。倒是有可能让你们两人——这件案子中的罪犯——接受一次心灵探测器的检验。你们希望我们那样做吗？”
谢顿与铎丝交换了一下眼色，然后谢顿说：“不，当然不要。”
“当然不要？”鲁斯重复道，声音中仅有些许嘲讽之意。“你却毫不犹豫地建议对别人这样做。”
另外那位警官，艾斯汀伍德，目前为止尚未说半句话，此时则露出微笑。
鲁斯又说：“我们还有情报显示，昨天你们在脐眼有过一场械斗，而且重伤一名达尔公民，名叫——”他按下计算机版的一个按键，读了读屏幕上的新画面：“厄金•玛隆。”
铎丝说：“你的情报有没有告诉你械斗的起因？”
“那和现在的问题毫无关联，夫人。你们否认发生过那场械斗吗？”
“我们当然不否认发生过械斗，”谢顿激动地说，“但我们否认是我们挑起来的。当时我们遭到攻击，凡纳比里夫人被这个玛隆抓住，而且他显然企图强暴她。接下来发生的事，只是单纯的自卫行动。难道达尔纵容强暴吗？”
鲁斯以近乎平板的声音说：“你说你们遭到攻击？被多少人攻击？”
“十名男子。”
“而你只有一个人，再加上一个女的，抵抗这十名男子？”
“只有凡纳比里夫人和我两人御敌，是的。”
“那么，你们两人怎么没有挂彩？你们有哪一个被割伤或打伤，——伤在看不见的部位？”
“没有，警官。”
“那么，在一个人——再加个女的——对付十人的格斗中，你们怎么会毫发无损？而那个原告，厄金•玛隆，却伤痕累累地躺在医院里，而且上唇需要接受皮肤移植？”
“我们应付得好。”谢顿绷着脸说。
“妤得难以置信。如果我告诉你，有三个人作证说你和你的朋友攻击玛隆——在毫无挑衅的情况下，你会怎么说？”
“我会说没人相信我们会那样做。我确定玛隆有案可查，是个滋事分子和带刀的凶徒。我告诉你当时有十个人，显然，有六个拒绝为谎言宣誓作证。其他三人有没有解释，为何他们未曾出手帮助他们的朋友——若是他们果真目睹他遭到毫无来由的攻击，而且性命受到威胁？你一定心知肚明，晓得他们是在说谎，”
“你建议对他们施用心灵探测器吗？”
“是的。而且你不用再问，我仍拒绝考虑用在我们身上。”
鲁斯说：“此外我们还接到情报，说你昨天离开暴动现场后，曾经去找一个叫达凡的人，一个被安全警察通缉在案的颠覆分子商议。这是真的吗？”
“你得自己证明这一点。”谢顿说，“我们不准备再回答任何问题。”
鲁斯将计算机版放回去。“只怕你们必须跟我们回总部接受进一步的侦讯。”
“我不认为有这个必要，警官。”谢顿说，“我们是外星人士，没有任何犯罪行为。我们曾经试图回避一名记者，因为他过分骚扰我们；而在本区中以犯罪闻名的地带，我们曾经试图保护自己，避免遭到强暴和可能的杀害；此外，我们也和许多达尔人谈过话。我看不出有任何理由该对我们做进一步的盘问，那样做等于是一种骚扰。”
“作决定的人是我们，”鲁斯说，“不是你。请你们跟我们走好吗？”
“不，我们不去。”铎丝说。
“小心！”堤沙佛夫人叫道：“她有两把刀子。”
鲁斯警官叹了一声：“谢谢你，夫人，不过我早就知道了。”他又转向铎丝，说：“你可知道在本区末经许可携带月械是一项重罪？你有许可证吗？”
“不，警官，我没有。”
“那么，你用来攻击玛隆的武器，显然是一把非法的刀械。这可是严重的罪上加罪，你知道吗？”
“这不算什么罪。”铎丝说，“请你了解一件事，玛隆也有一把刀，而且我确定他没许可证。”
“这点我们并无证据，而且玛隆身上有刀伤，你们两人谁也没有。”
“他当然有一把刀，警官。假使你不知道脐眼每一个人，以及达尔大部分的人都带着刀，而且或许都没有许可证，那你就是达尔唯一不知不晓的人。在此地不论你转到哪里，都能找到公然贩刀的商店。这点你不知道吗？”
鲁斯说：“我对这方面知道多少并不重要，其他人是否违法或有多少人违法也不重要。此时此刻，重要的是凡纳比里夫人触犯了反刀械法。我必须请你立刻将那两把刀交给我，夫人，然后你们两人必须随我到总部去。”
铎丝说：“既然这样，把我的刀子取走啊。”
鲁斯又叹了一声：“夫人，你一定不会认为刀械是我们达尔唯一的武器，或是我需要和你进行一场刀战。我的搭档和我都有手铳，可以在瞬间将你摧毁，远在你的双手能碰到刀把之前——不论你有多快。当然，我们不会使用手铳，因为我们不是来杀你的。然而，我们每人都有一柄神经鞭，可以随意用来对付你。我希望你不会要求一次示范。它不会要你的命，或是造成任何永久性伤害，甚至不会留下任何伤痕——但那种痛苦绝对难以忍受。现在我的搭档正举着神经鞭对着你，而这是我的——好啦，把你的刀交给我们，凡纳比里夫人。”
顿了一会之后，谢顿说：“没有用的，铎丝，把你的刀给他。”
就在这时，大门响起一阵狂暴的敲击声，一个高八度的吼叫声传了进来。
Chapter 79

Raych had not entirely left the neighborhood after he had walked them back to their apartment house.
He had eaten well while waiting for the interview with Davan to be done and later had slept a bit after finding a bathroom that more or less worked. He really had no place to go now that all that was done. He had a home of sorts and a mother who was not likely to be perturbed if he stayed away for a while. She never was.
He did not know who his father was and wondered sometimes if he really had one. He had been told he had to have one and the reasons for that had been explained to him crudely enough. Sometimes he wondered if he ought to believe so peculiar a story, but he did find the details titillating. He thought of that in connection with the lady. She was an old lady, of course, but she was pretty and she could fight like a man--better than a man. It filled him with vague notions.
And she had offered to let him take a bath. He could swim in the Billibotton pool sometimes when he had some credits he didnt need for anything else or when he could sneak in. Those were the only times he got wet all over, but it was chilly and he had to wait to get dry.
Taking a bath was different. There would be hot water, soap, towels, and warm air. He wasnt sure what it would feel like, except that it would be nice if she was there.
He was walkway-wise enough to know of places where he could park himself in an alley off a walkway that would be near a bathroom and still be near enough to where she was, yet where he probably wouldnt be found and made to run away. He spent the night thinking strange thoughts. What if he did learn to read and write? Could he do something with that? He wasnt sure what, but maybe they could tell him. He had vague ideas of being paid money to do things he didnt know how to do now, but he didnt know what those things might be. He would have to be told, but how do you get told?
If he stayed with the man and the lady, they might help. But why should they want him to stay with them?
He drowsed off, coming to later, not because the light was brightening, but because his sharp ears caught the heightening and deepening of sounds from the walkway as the activities of the day began.
He had learned to identify almost every variety of sound, because in the underground maze of Billibotton, if you wanted to survive with even a minimum of comfort, you had to be aware of things before you saw them. And there was something about the sound of a ground-car motor that he now heard that signaled danger to him. It had an official sound, a hostile sound. He shook himself awake and stole quietly toward the walkway. He scarcely needed to see the Spaceship-and-Sun on the ground-car. Its lines were enough. He knew they had to be coming for the man and the lady because they had seen Davan.
He did not pause to question his thoughts or to analyze them. He was off on a run, beating his way through the gathering life of the day. He was back in less than fifteen minutes. The ground-car was still there and there were curious and cautious onlookers gazing at it from all sides and from a respectful distance. There would soon be more. He pounded his way up the stairs, trying to remember which door he should bang on. No time for the elevator. He found the door--at least he thought he did--and he banged, shouting in a squeak, "Lady! Lady!"
He was too excited to remember her name, but he remembered part of the mans.
"Hari!" he shouted. "Let me in."
The door opened and he rushed in--tried to rush in. The rough hand of an officer seized his arm. "Hold it, kid. Where do you think youre going?"
"Leggo! I aint done nothin." He looked about. "Hey, lady, whatre they doin?"
"Arresting us," said Dors grimly.
"What for?" said Raych, panting and struggling. "Hey, leggo, you Sunbadger. Dont go with him, lady. You dont have to go with him."
"You get out," said Russ, shaking the boy vehemently.
"No, I aint, You aint either, Sunbadger. My whole gang is coming. You aint gettin out, lessn you let these guys go."
"What whole gang?" said Russ, frowning.
"Theyre right outside now. Probly takin your ground-car apart. And theyll take yore apart."
Russ turned toward his partner, "Call headquarters. Have them send out a couple of trucks with Macros."
"No!" shrieked Raych, breaking loose and rushing at Astinwald. "Dont call!"
Russ leveled his neuronic whip and fired.
Raych shrieked, grasped at his right shoulder, and fell down, wriggling madly. Russ had not yet turned back to Seldon, when the latter, seizing him by the wrist, pushed the neuronic whip up in the air and then around and behind, while stamping on his foot to keep him relatively motionless. Hari could feel the shoulder dislocate, even while Russ emitted a hoarse, agonized yell. Astinwald raised his blaster quickly, but Dorss left arm was around his shoulder and the knife in her right hand was at his throat.
"Dont move!" she said. "Move a millimeter, any part of you, and I cut you through your neck to the spine.--drop the blaster. drop it! And the neuronic whip."
Seldon picked up Raych, still moaning, and held him tightly. He turned to Tisalver and said, "There are people out there. Angry people. Ill have them in here and theyll break up everything youve got. Theyll smash the walls. If you dont want that to happen, pick up those weapons and throw them into the next room. Take the weapons from the security officer on the door and do the same. Quickly! Get your wife to help. Shell think twice next time before sending in complaints against innocent people.--Dors, this one on the floor wont do anything for a while. Put the other one out of action, but dont kill him."
"Right," said Dors. Reversing her knife, she struck him hard on the skull with the haft. He went to his knees.
She made a face. "I hate doing that."
"They fired at Raych," said Seldon, trying to mask his own sick feeling at what had happened.
They left the apartment hurriedly and, once out on the walkway, found it choked with people, almost all men, who raised a shout when they saw them emerge. They pushed in close and the smell of poorly washed humanity was overpowering. Someone shouted, "Where are the Sunbadgers?"
"Inside," called out Dors piercingly. "Leave them alone. Theyll be helpless for a while, but theyll get reinforcements, so get out of here fast."
"What about you?" came from a dozen throats.
"Were getting out too. We wont be back."
"Ill take care of them," shrilled Raych, struggling out of Seldons arms and standing on his feet. He was rubbing his right shoulder madly. "I can walk. Lemme past."
The crowd opened for him and he said, "Mister, lady, come with me. Fast!" They were accompanied down the walkway by several dozen men and then Raych suddenly gestured at an opening and muttered, "In here, folks. Ill rake ya to a place no one will ever find ya. Even Davan probly dont know it. Only thing is, we got to go through the sewer levels. No one will see us there, but its sort of stinky ... know what I mean?"
"I imagine well survive," muttered Seldon.
And down they went along a narrow spiraling ramp and up rose the mephitic odors to greet them.
第七十九章
　　芮奇带他们回到公寓后，并未真正离开这个小区。
在达凡住处外等待的时候，他利用时间饱餐了一顿。后来，在找到一间多少还能使用的盥洗室后，他又小睡了一会儿。现在能做的事都做了，他实在没什么地方可去。他也箅有个家，但他即使有一阵子不回去，他的母亲也不大可能担心，她从来都不会。
他不知道自己的父亲是谁，有时甚至怀疑是否真有一个父亲。不过有人曾告诉他，说他一定要有一个，并以足够露骨的方式将理由解释给他听。他有时也怀疑是否该相信这么奇特的故事，但他的确发觉那些细节令人心痒。
他将那件事与那位大姐联想到一块。她当然是个年纪不小的大姐，可是她相当漂亮，而且能像男人一样打斗——甚至比男人更厉害。这使他心中模模糊糊地有种感觉。
而且，她还提议要让他洗个澡！他有时能在脐眼的游泳池泡一泡，那是当他有些没处花的信用点，或是能偷溜进去的时候。游泳是他唯一全身浸湿的机会，但总是相当寒冷，而且事后还得把身子晾干。
洗澡则是完全不同的一回事，会有热水、肥皂、毛巾与热气流。他不确定那会是什么样的感觉，只晓得如果她也在场必将十分美好。
他对这一带的人行道非常熟悉，知道躲在旁边巷道内的哪些地方，不但离她近，又距麝洗室不远，而且还不会被人发现，不至于落荒而逃。
他整夜都在冒出一些奇怪的念头。他要是真的学会读书写字，那会怎么样？他能用这本事做什么事吗？他不确定能做什么，但她或许能告诉他。对于做些现在不知道如何做的事而赚到工资，他有些模糊的概念，但不晓得那会是此什么样的事。这得有人告诉他才行，可是要怎样才能找到这样的人？
假如他留在那个男人与那位大姐身边，他们或许会帮助他。但是，他们留他在身边要干吗？
他打起瞌睡，不久又清醒过来，并非因为光线变得明亮，而是尖锐的耳朵察觉到来自人行道的声音有了大幅起落，标志着一天的活动已经开始。
他早已学会分辨儿乎每一种不同的卢音，因为在脐眼这种地底迷宫，即使想要以最低限度的舒适存活，也必须在看到任何事物前能先察觉。他现在听到的是地面车发动机的声音，对他而言那通常代表危险，这回更多夹带了一重意义。它具有一种官方的声音，一种敌意的声音……
他甩了甩头，让自己清醒过来，再悄悄向人行道走去。光看车子的外形，他就知道用不着再去找那辆车上的“星舰与太阳”标志。他知道，他们必定是来抓那一男一女的，因为他们曾经见过达凡。他未曾停下来质疑自己的想法或加以分析，而是立刻拔腿飞奔，存逐渐拥挤的人群中冲出一条路。
不到十五分钟他又回来了。那辆地面车仍在那里，许多好奇而谨慎的旁观者站在远处，从四面八方向这里望来——很快还会涌来更多人。他一面“砰砰砰”地爬上楼梯，一面试着记起该捶哪家的门——根本没时间搭升降机。
他终于找到那扇门——至少他认为如此。他开始使劲捶门，同时以尖锐的声音喊道：“大姐！大姐！”
他竟然激动地一时忘了她的名字，不过他还记得那男子的部分姓名。“哈里！”他吼道，“让我进去。”
房门打开后，他立刻冲进去——应该说试图冲进去。一名警官的粗大手掌抓住他的手臂。“慢着，小子，你以为你要到哪里去？”
“撒手！我啥也没做。”他四下望了望，“嘿，大姐，他们在干啥？”
“要逮捕我们。”铎丝绷着脸说。
“为什么？”芮奇一面喘气一面挣扎，“嘿，撒手，你这个太阳徽仔。别跟他走，大姐，你不必跟他走。”
“你滚开。”鲁斯一面说，一面猛力摇晃这个男孩。
“不，我不。你也别走，太阳徽仔。我的整帮人就要来啦，你逃不掉的，除非你让这两个人走。”
“什么整帮人？”鲁斯皱起眉头。
“现在他们就在外面，说不定正在拆你的地面车，他们还会把你也拆了。”
鲁斯转向他的搭档：“通知总部，要他们派几辆载满宏的卡车来。”
“不！”芮奇尖叫一卢，甩脱鲁斯，朝艾斯汀伍德冲过去，“别打电话！”
鲁斯举起神经鞭，瞄准后就是一枪。
芮奇惨叫一声，伸手抓住自己的右肩，随即跌倒在地，身子发狂般抽搐。
鲁斯还来不及转身，谢顿已从后面抓住他的手腕，将神经鞭推向半空，再将他的手扭到身后，同时踏住他一只脚，令他几乎动弹不得。在鲁斯发出嘶哑、痛苦的叫喊时，谢顿已能感到他的肩膀脱臼了。
艾斯汀伍德很快举起他的手铳，但铎丝的左臂搂住了他的肩膀，右手的刀子架在他的喉头。
“别动！”她说，“只要你一动——不论你身上哪个部位都一样，这把刀会从你的颈子一直切到脊柱。把手铳丢掉，丢掉！还有神经鞭。”
谢顿扶起仍在呻吟的芮奇，将他紧紧抱住，然后转向堤沙佛说：“外面有大批群众，愤怒的群众。假如我叫他们进来这里，他们会打烂你所有的一切，还会把每一面墙打碎。如果你不想发生这种事，就捡起这些武器，把它们丢到隔壁房间。还有，那个躺在地板上的也一样，把他身上的武器通通取走，同样丢到隔壁去。快！叫你太太帮忙。下次她控告无辜者之前，她会三思而行。铎丝，这个倒在地板上的暂时不能动，让另一个也失去行动能力，但是别杀他。”
“好的。”铎丝答道。她倒转刀身，用刀柄在那人头盖骨上重击一记，他立刻屈膝倒地。
她做了个鬼脸：“我痛恨这样做。”
“他们先攻击芮奇。”谢顿这么说，试图掩饰自己对这些事的厌恶。
他们匆匆离开那栋公寓，来到了人行道，立刻发觉外面人山人海，其中几乎部是男性。看到他们出现之后，那些人发出一声欢呼。他们纷纷向前凑近，一股从未好好洗澡的强烈气味扑鼻而朱。
有人喊道：“那些太阳徽仔在哪里？”
“黾面，”铎丝以刺耳的声音叫道，“别管他们。他们会有一阵子什么事也无法做，不过他们将得到增援，大家尽快散了吧。”
“你们怎么办？”十多个人异口同声问道。
“我们也要离开，不会再回来。”
“我会照顾他们。”芮奇尖声道，说完便挣脱谢顿的臂膀，自己站了起来。他一面拼命搓揉右肩，　一面说：“我可以走，让我过。”
群众为他让出一条路，他说：“先生，大姐，跟我来。快！”
几十名男子陪同他们沿着人行道前进。走了一会儿之后，芮奇突然指着一个开口处，喃喃说道：“这里，伙伴们。我要带你们到一个谁也找不到的地方，就连达凡说不定也不知道。只是有一件事，我们得通过污水层。那里不会有人发现我们，不过有那么点臭……知道我的意思吗？”
“我想我们死不了。”谢顿喃喃答道。
于是他们沿着狭窄的螺旋坡道向下走，迎接他们的恶臭逐渐向上袭来。
Chapter 80
Raych found them a hiding place. It had meant climbing up the metal rungs of a ladder and it had led them to a large loftlike room, the use of which Seldon could not imagine. It was filled with equipment, bulky and silent, the function of which also remained a mystery. The room was reasonably clean and free of dust and a steady draft of air wafted through that prevented the dust from settling and--more important seemed to lessen the odor.
Raych seemed pleased. "Aint this nice?" he demanded. He still rubbed his shoulder now and then and winced when he rubbed too hard.
"It could be worse," said Seldon. "Do you know what this place is used for, Raych?"
Raych shrugged or began to do so and winced. "I dunno," he said. Then he added with a touch of swagger, "Who cares?"
Dors, who had sat down on the floor after brushing it with her hand and then looking suspiciously at her palm, said, "If you want a guess, I think this is part of a complex that is involved in the detoxification and recycling of wastes. The stuff must surely end up as fertilizer."
"Then," said Seldon gloomily, "those who run the complex will be down here periodically and may come at any moment, for all we know."
"I been here before," said Raych. "I never saw no one here."
"I suppose Trantor is heavily automated wherever possible and if anything calls for automation it would be this treatment of wastes," said Dors. "We may be safe ... for a while."
"Not for long. Well get hungry and thirsty, Dors."
"I can get food and water for us," said Raych. "Ya got to know how to make out if youre an alley kid."
"Thank you, Raych," said Seldon absently, "but right now Im not hungry." He sniffed. "I may never be hungry again."
"You will be," said Dors, "and even if you lose your appetite for a while, youll get thirsty. At least elimination is no problem. Were practically living over what is clearly an open sewer."
There was silence for a while. The light was dim and Seldon wondered why the Trantorians didnt keep it dark altogether. But then it occurred to him that he had never encountered true darkness in any public area. It was probably a habit in an energy-rich society. Strange that a world of forty billion should be energy-rich, but with the internal heat of the planet to draw upon, to say nothing of solar energy and nuclear fusion plants in space, it was. In fact, come to think of it, there was no energy-poor planet in the Empire. Was there a time when technology had been so primitive that energy poverty was possible? He leaned against a system of pipes through which--for all he knew--sewage ran. He drew away from the pipes as the thought occurred to him and he sat down next to Dors.
He said, "Is there any way we can get in touch with Chetter Hummin?"
Dors said, "As a matter of fact, I did send a message, though I hated to."
"You hated to?"
"My orders are to protect you. Each time I have to get in touch with him, it means Ive failed."
Seldon regarded her out of narrowed eyes. "Do you have to be so compulsive, Dors? You cant protect me against the security officers of an entire sector."
"I suppose not. We can disable a few--"
"I know. We did. But theyll send out reinforcements ... armored ground-cars ... neuronic cannon ... sleeping mist. Im not sure what they have, but theyre going to throw in their entire armory. Im sure of it."
"Youre probably right," said Dors, her mouth tightening.
"They wont find ya, lady," said Raych suddenly. His sharp eyes had moved from one to the other as they talked. "They never find Davan."
Dors smiled without joy and ruffled the boys hair, then looked at the palm of her hand with a little dismay. She said, "Im not sure if you ought to stay with us, Raych. I dont want them finding you."
"They wont find me and if I leave ya, wholl get ya food and water and wholl find ya new hidin places, so the Sunbadgersll never know where to look?"
"No, Raych, theyll find us. They dont really look too hard for Davan. He annoys them, but I suspect they dont take him seriously. Do you know what I mean?"
"You mean hes just a pain in the ... the neck and they figure he aint worth chasing all over the lot."
"Yes, thats what I mean. But you see, we hurt two of the officers very badly and theyre not going to let us get away with that. If it takes their whole force--if they have to sweep through every hidden or unused corridor in the sector--theyll get us."
Raych said, "That makes me feel like ... like [natinn]. If I didnt run in there and get zapped, ya wouldnt have taken out them officers and ya wouldnt be in such trouble."
"No, sooner or later, wed have--uh--taken them out. Who knows? We may have to take out a few more."
"Well, ya did it beautiful," said Raych. "If I hadnt been aching all over, I couldve watched more and enjoyed it."
Seldon said, "It wouldnt do us any good to try to fight the entire security system. The question is: What will they do to us once they have us? A prison sentence, surely."
"Oh no. If necessary, well have to appeal to the Emperor," put in Dors.
"The Emperor?" said Raych, wide-eyed. "You know the Emperor?"
Seldon waved at the boy. "Any Galactic citizen can appeal to the Emperor.--That strikes me as the wrong thing to do, Dors. Ever since Hummin and I left the Imperial Sector, weve been evading the Emperor."
"Not to the extent of being thrown into a Dahlite prison. The Imperial appeal will serve as a delay--in any case, a diversion--and perhaps in the course of that delay, we can think of something else."
"Theres Hummin."
"Yes, there is," said Dors uneasily, "but we cant consider him the do-it-all. For one thing, even if my message reached him and even if he was able to rush to Dahl, how would he find us here? And, even if he did, what could he do against the entire Dahlite security force?"
"In that case," said Seldon. "Were going to have to think of something we can do before they find us."
Raych said, "If ya follow me, I can keep ya ahead of them. I know every place there is around here."
"You can keep us ahead of one person, but therell be a great many, moving down any number of corridors. Well escape one group and bump into another."
They sat in uncomfortable silence for a good while, each confronting what seemed to be a hopeless situation. Then Dors Venabili stirred and said in a tense, low whisper, "Theyre here. I hear them."
For a while, they strained, listening, then Raych sprang to his feet and hissed, "They comin that way. We gotta go this way."
Seldon, confused, heard nothing at all, but would have been content to trust the others superior hearing, but even as Raych began moving hastily and quietly away from the direction of the approaching tread, a voice rang out echoing against the sewer walls. "Dont move. Dont move."
And Raych said, "Thats Davan. Howd he know we were here?"
"Davan?" said Seldon. "Are you sure?"
"Sure Im sure. Hell help."
第八十章
　　芮奇为他们找到一处藏身之地。他们攀着一架金属梯爬了许多级，才来到这个类似阁楼的大房间，谢顿无从想象它的功用是什么。室内被一具体积庞大、安静无声的设备占据，它的功能同样无从猜测。这个房间相当清洁，几乎一尘不染。通风门送出一股稳定的气流，不但阻止了灰尘的堆积，更重要的是，似乎也减轻了那股恶臭。
芮奇好像很高兴。“这里好不好？”他追问道。他仍不时搓揉他的肩头，揉得太用力时总会缩一下脖子。
“比我想象中的好，”谢顿说，“你知道这地方是做什么用的吗，芮奇？”
芮奇耸了耸肩——或者说正要这么做——却又缩了一下脖子。“我不知。”说完，他又带点倨傲补充道：“谁管它？”
铎丝用手摸摸地板，怀疑地看了看她的手掌，然后才坐下来。她说：“如果你要我猜，我想这个建筑群是做废物的去毒和回收用的，这里是它的一部分。这些东西最后当然是变成肥料。”
“那么，”谢顿以沮丧的口吻说，“那些管理这个建筑群的人，会定期下来这里，而且随时有可能来。”
“我以前在这儿待过，”芮奇说，“我从来没碰见过人。”
“我想川陀各处已尽可能高度自动化了，要说有什么东两最需要自动化，那就非废物处埋莫属。”铎丝说，“这里应该很安全……如果只是待一阵子。”
“不会太久的，我们会饿会渴，铎丝。”
“我可以找来食物和饮水。”芮奇说，“如果你是个野孩子，你就得知道该怎么凑合。”
“谢谢你，芮奇，”谢顿心不在焉地说，“可是我现在不饿。”他闻了闻周遭的气味，“我也许再也不会想吃东西了。”
“你会的，”铎丝说，“即使你暂时失去胃口，你也会口渴。在这里，至少排泄不成问题，我们等于住在一个显然是开放的下水道上。”
接着是一阵沉默。此地光线暗淡，谢顿不禁纳闷川陀人为何不让它保持完全黑暗。不过他随即想到，不论在任何公共场所，他从未遇见过真正的黑暗，这或许是能源充足社会的一种习惯。说来也真奇怪，一个拥有四百亿人口的世界竟然能源充足。不过，既然有行星内部的热量可供吸取，更别提太阳能与太空中的核融合电厂，因此事实就是如此。其实，再仔细想一想，帝国之中根本没有能源短缺的行星。过去是否曾有一段科技十分原始的时期，使得能源贫乏成为可能的事？
他倚靠在一组输送管上，据他所知，里面流动的应该是污水。想到这点后，他赶紧离开那组管子，坐到铎丝身旁。
他说：“我们有没有任何办法，能和契特•夫铭取得联络？”
铎丝说：“事实上，我的确送出了一道信息——虽然我痛恨这样做。”
“你痛恨这样做？”
“我的使命是保护你。每次我不得不和他联络时，就代表我又失败了。”
谢顿眯起眼睛凝视着她：“你一定要如此强迫自己吗，铎丝？面对整区的安全警力，你根本无法保护我。”
“我想是不行。我们能打垮几个……”
“我知道，我们做到了。但他们会派出增援部队……装甲地面车……神经炮……催眠雾。我不确定他们有些什么，可是他们会投入所有的军火，这点我确定。”
“你或许是对的。”铎丝绷着嘴说。
“他们不会抓到你。大姐。”芮奇突然说。刚才他们交谈的时候，他锐利的目光轮流扫在两人身上，“他们从没找到达凡。”
铎丝勉强笑了笑，伸手抓抓男孩的头发，然后带着些许嫌恶的表情望着自己的手掌。“我不确定你应不应该跟我们待在一起，芮奇。我不想让他们抓到你。”
“他们不会抓到我。而且我要是走了，谁来帮你们找食物和饮水，谁又来帮你们找新的藏匿地点，好让太阳徽仔永远不知上哪儿去抓？”
“不，芮奇，他们会找到我们。他们没有真正尽力寻找达凡。他为他们带来困扰，但我怀疑他们并未将他看得多严重。你知道我的意思吗？”
“你的意思是说，他只是……‘脖子上的一点小伤’，不值得翻遍整个地带追捕他。”
“是的，那正是我的意思。可是你看，我们把两名警官打成重伤，他们不会让我们就这样逍遥法外。假若他们动用全部警力；假如他们必须扫荡本区每个隐匿或无用的回廊，他们就会抓到我们。”
芮奇说：“那使我觉得自己好像……好像不算什么。如果我没跑到那里去，而且挨了一记，你们就不会撂倒那两个警官，就不会有这样的麻烦。”
“不，早晚我们还是会——嗯——撂倒他们。谁知道呢？我们也许还得再撂倒几个。”
“嗯，你的动作漂亮极了。”芮奇说，“要不是我全身疼痛，我就能看到更多细节，好好欣赏一番。”
谢顿说：“试图对抗整个安全系统，对我们没有任何好处。现在问题是：一旦抓到我们，他们会把我们怎么样？不用说，当然是判决收监。”
“噢，不。如果有必要，我们得向皇上提出上诉。”铎丝插嘴道。
“皇上？”芮奇张大眼睛，“你们认识皇上？”
谢顿对男孩挥了挥手。“任何一个银河帝国公民都能向皇上上诉——但是，铎丝，我觉得那样做是错误的。自从夫铭和我离开皇区之后，我们就一直在躲避这个皇上。”
“以前没有被丢进达尔监狱的威胁。上诉皇上将是一种拖延战术——至少是一种牵制。也许在拖延的过稃中，我们能想到什么别的办法。”
“还有夫铭呢！”
“是的，还有他。”铎丝以不安的口气说，“但我们不能把他视为万灵丹。理由之一，即使我的讯息传到他手中，即使他能赶来达尔，他又如何找到我们？还有，就算他做到这点，面对整个达尔的安全警力，他又能做些什么？”
“这样说来，”谢顿说，“在我们被发现之前，我们必须想个可行的办法。”
芮奇说：“如果你们跟我走，我能让你们一直走在他们前面，我知道附近每一个地方。”
“你也许可以让我们走在一个人前面，但他们会派出很多很多人，钻进所有的回廊。我们躲过一组人，又会撞见另外一组。”
接下来有好一阵子，他们坐在不安的沉默中，面对着一个似乎无助的局面。然后，铎丝•凡纳比里颤抖了一下，以紧张、低沉的悄悄话说：“他们来了，我听到他们了。”
他们绷紧神经，倾听了好一会儿，然后芮奇突然跳起来，掐着嗓子说：“他们从那边来，我们得往这边走。”
谢顿感到相当疑惑，他什么也没听到，不过他情愿相信其他两人的超人听觉。但就在芮奇开始迅速地、悄悄地朝脚步声相反的方向移动时，一个声音突然响起，在下水道的墙壁激起回声。“别走，别走。”
芮奇立刻说：“那是达凡，他怎么知道我们在这里？”
“达凡！”谢顿说，“你确定吗？”
“我当然确定，他会帮助我们。”
Chapter 81
Davan asked, "What happened?"
Seldon felt minimally relieved. Surely, the addition of Davan could scarcely count against the full force of the Dahl Sector, but, then again, he commanded a number of people who might create enough confusion.
He said, "You should know, Davan. I suspect that many of the crowd who were at Tisalvers place this morning were your people."
"Yes, a number were. The story is that you were being arrested and that you manhandled a squadron of Sunbadgers. But why were you being arrested?"
"Two," said Seldon, lifting two fingers. "Two Sunbadgers. And thats bad enough. Part of the reason we were being arrested was that we had gone to see you."
"Thats not enough. The Sunbadgers dont bother with me much as a general thing." He added bitterly, "They underestimate me."
"Maybe," said Seldon, "but the woman from whom we rent our rooms reported us for having started a riot ... over the newsman we ran into on our way to you. You know about that. With your people on the scene yesterday and again this morning and with two officers badly hurt, they may well decide to clean out these corridors--and that means you will suffer. I really am sorry. I had no intention or expectation of being the cause of any of this."
But Davan shook his head. "No, you dont know the Sunbadgers. Thats not enough either. They dont want to clean us up. The sector would have to do something about us if they did. Theyre only too happy to let us rot in Billibotton and the other slums. No, theyre after you. What have you done?"
Dors said impatiently, "Weve done nothing and, in any case, what does it matter? If theyre not after you and they are after us, theyre going to come down here to flush us out. If you get in the way, youll be in deep trouble."
"No, not me. I have friends--powerful friends," said Davan. "I told you that last night. And they can help you as well as me. When you refused to help us openly, I got in touch with them. They know who you are, Dr. Seldon. Youre a famous man. Theyre in a position to talk to the Mayor of Dahl and see to it that you are left alone, whatever you have done. But youll have to be taken away--out of Dahl."
Seldon smiled. Relief flooded over him. He said, "You know someone powerful, do you, Davan? Someone who responds at once, who has the ability to talk the Dahl government out of taking drastic steps, and who can take us away? Good. Im not surprised." He turned to Dors, smiling. "Its Mycogen all over again. How does Hummin do it?"
But Dors shook her head. "Too quick.--I dont understand."
Seldon said, "I believe he can do anything."
"I know him better than you do--and longer--and I dont believe that."
Seldon smiled, "Dont underestimate him." And then, as though anxious not to linger longer on that subject, he turned to Davan. "But how did you find us? Raych said you knew nothing about this place."
"He dont," shrilled Raych indignantly. "This place is all mine. I found it."
"Ive never been here before," said Davan, looking about. "Its an interesting place. Raych is a corridor creature, perfectly at home in this maze."
"Yes, Davan, we gathered as much ourselves. But how did you find it?"
"A heat-seeker. I have a device that detects infra-red radiation, the particular thermal pattern that is given off at thirty-seven degrees Celsius. It will react to the presence of human beings and not to other heat sources. It reacted to you three."
Dors was frowning. "What good is that on Trantor, where there are human beings everywhere? They have them on other worlds, but--"
Davan said, "But not on Trantor. I know. Except that they are useful in the slums, in the forgotten, decaying corridors and alleyways."
"And where did you get it?" asked Seldon.
Davan said, "Its enough that I have it.--But weve got to get you away, Master Seldon. Too many people want you and I want my powerful friend to have you."
"Where is he, this powerful friend of yours?"
"Hes approaching. At least a new thirty-seven-degree source is registering and I dont see that it can be anyone else."
Through the door strode a newcomer, but Seldons glad exclamation died on his lips. It was not Chetter Hummin.
Wye
WYE-- ... A sector of the world-city of Trantor ... In the latter centuries of the Galactic Empire, Wye was the strongest and stablest portion of the world-city. Its rulers had long aspired to the Imperial throne, justifying that by their descent from early Emperors. Under Mannix IV, Wye was militarized and (Imperial authorities later claimed) was planning a planet-wide coup .
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第八十一章
　　达凡说：“发生了什么事？”
谢顿这才稍微松了一口气。当然，面对达尔区的整个警力，多了达凡一人几乎不算什么。不过话说回来，他指挥着一大批人，他们应该可以制造足够的混乱……
他说：“你应该知道的，达凡。我猜想今天早上在堤沙佛处聚集的群众，有许多都是你的手下。”
“没错，是有不少。传闻说你们在即将被逮捕时对付了一中队的太阳徽仔。但你们为何会遭到逮捕呢？”
“两个，”谢顿一面说，一面举起两根指头。“两个太阳徽仔而已，这就够糟了。我们遭到逮捕的部分原因，就是我们曾经去见过你。”
“那还不够，太阳徽仔不怎么把我当回事。”他又以苦涩的口吻补充道，“他们低估了我。”
“或许吧，”谢顿说，“可是把房子租给我们的那个女的，告发我们曾经掀起一场暴动……对付那名我们去找你时遇到的记者，你知道这回事。你的人昨天和今天早上都在现场，再加上两名警官受了重伤，他们很可能会决定扫清这些回廊——这就代表你要遭殃。我真的很抱歉，我从未打算或指望引发这种事。”
达凡却摇了摇头：“不，你不了解那些太阳徽仔，这个理由还是不够。他们并不想清除我们，如果他们那样做了，这个区就必须为我们做些安排。让我们在脐眼和其他贫民窟中腐烂，他们高兴还来不及呢。不，他们是要抓你们——你们。你们到底做了什么？”
铎丝不耐烦地说：“我们什么也没做，而且不管怎样，这根本不重要。如他们不是在抓你，而真的是在抓我们，他们就会下来这里，把我们通通赶出去。要是你挺身而出，你就会有大麻烦。”
“不，不是我。我有些朋友——有权有势的朋友，”达凡说，“昨晚我对你们说过，他们能像帮我一样地帮助你们。在你们拒绝公开帮我们之后，我跟他们取得了联络。他们知道你是谁，谢顿博士，你是个名人。他们的地位能和达尔区长直接通话，而且能确保达尔放你们一马，不论你们曾经做过什么。可是你们必须被带走——离开达尔。”
谢顿微微一笑，全身顿感松懈。他说：“你认识某位有权有势的人，对不对，达凡？某位立即做出响应，有能力劝阻达尔政府采取激烈手段，而且能将我们带走的人？很好，我不惊讶。”他带着笑容转向铎丝，“这完全是麦曲生的翻版，夫铭是如何做到的？”
铎丝却摇了摇头：“太快了——我不懂。”
谢顿说：“我相信他做得到任何事。”
“我对他的认识比你更深，而且更久，我不相信有这种事。”
谢顿又微微一笑：“可别低估他。”然后，他仿佛急于转换话题，随即转向达凡说：“但你是怎样找到我们的？芮奇说你对此处一无所知。”
“他懂什么，”芮奇愤慨地尖叫道，“这地方全属于我，是我发现的。”
“我以前从未来过这里。”达凡一面说，一面环顾四周。“这是个有趣的地方，芮奇的确是个回廊生物，在这个迷宫中就像在家里一样。”
“没错，达凡，这我们也知道。但你是怎么找来的？”
“利用热源追踪仪。我有个装置能侦测红外辐射，针对摄氏三十七度的热辐射模式校准。它只会对人体有反应，因此我们才能侦测到你们三人的位置。”
铎丝皱着眉头说：“川陀到处都是人，这种东西在这里有什么用？其他世界不难见到，可是……”
达凡说：“可是川陀没有，这点我知道。只不过在贫民窟中，在遭人遗忘的、腐朽的回廊和窄巷中，它还是能派上用场。”
“你从哪里弄来的？”谢顿问道。
达凡说：“知道我有就够了——但我们必须将你弄走，谢顿老爷。如今想要你的人太多，而我只要那位有权有势的朋友得到你。”
“他往哪里，你那位有权有势的朋友？”
“他正走过来。至少一个新的三十七度热源显现了，除他之外，我看不出还可能会是谁。”
另一个人从门口大步走来，谢顿的欢呼却冻结在唇边——那并非契特•夫铭。
Chapter 82

The man who entered was tall and muscular. He had a long blond mustache that curled up at the tips and a fringe of hair that went down the sides of his face and under his chin, leaving the point of his chin and his lower lip smoothly bare and seeming a little moist. His head was so closely cropped and his hair was so light that, for one unpleasant moment, Seldon was reminded of Mycogen. The newcomer wore what was unmistakably a uniform. It was red and white and about his waist was a wide belt decorated with silver studs. His voice, when he spoke, was a rolling bass and its accent was not like any that Seldon had heard before. Most unfamiliar accents sounded uncouth in Seldons experience, but this one seemed almost musical, perhaps because of the richness of the low tones.
"I am Sergeant Emmer Thalus," he rumbled in a slow succession of syllables. "I have come seeking Dr. Hari Seldon."
Seldon said, "I am he." In an aside to Dors, he muttered, "if Hummin couldnt come himself, he certainly sent a magnificent side of beef to represent him."
The sergeant favored Seldon with a stolid and slightly prolonged look. Then he said, "Yes. You have been described to me. Please come with me, Dr. Seldon."
Seldon said, "Lead the way."
The sergeant stepped backward. Seldon and Dors Venabili stepped forward. The sergeant stopped and raised a large hand, palm toward Dors. "I have been instructed to take Dr. Hari Seldon with me. I have not been instructed to take anyone else."
For a moment, Seldon looked at him uncomprehendingly. Then his look of surprise gave way to anger. "Its quite impossible that you have been told that, Sergeant. Dr. Dors Venabili is my associate and my companion. She must come with me."
"That is not in accordance with my instructions, Doctor."
"I dont care about your instructions in any way, Sergeant Thalus. I do not budge without her."
"Whats more," said Dors with clear irritation, "my instructions are to protect Dr. Seldon at all times. I cannot do that unless I am with him. Therefore, where he goes, I go."
The sergeant looked puzzled. "My instructions are strict that I see to it that no harm comes to you, Dr. Seldon. If you will not come voluntarily, I must carry you to my vehicle. I will try to do so gently." He extended his two arms as though to seize Seldon by the waist and carry him off bodily.
Seldon skittered backward and out of reach. As he did so, the side of his right palm came down on the sergeants right upper arm where the muscles were thinnest, so that he struck the bone.
The sergeant drew a sudden deep breath and seemed to shake himself a bit, but turned, face expressionless, and advanced again. Davan, watching, remained where he was, motionless, but Raych moved behind the sergeant.
Seldon repeated his palm stroke a second time, then a third, but now Sergeant Thalus, anticipating the blow, lowered his shoulder to catch it on hard muscle. Dors had drawn her knives.
"Sergeant," she said forcefully. "Turn in this direction, I want you to understand I may be forced to hurt you severely if you persist in attempting to carry Dr. Seldon off against his will."
The sergeant paused, seemed to take in the slowly waving knives solemnly, then said, "It is not in my instructions to refrain from harming anyone but Dr. Seldon."
His right hand moved with surprising speed toward the neuronic whip in the holster at his hip. Dors moved as quickly forward, knives flashing. Neither completed the movement.
Dashing forward, Raych had pushed at the sergeants back with his left hand and withdrew the sergeants weapon from its holster with his right. He moved away quickly, holding the neuronic whip in both hands now and shouting, "Hands up, Sergeant, or youre gonna get it!"
The sergeant whirled and a nervous look crossed his reddening face. It was the only moment that its stolidity had weakened. "Put that down, sonny," he growled. "You dont know how it works."
Raych howled, "I know about the safety. Its off and this thing can fire. And it will if you try to rush me."
The sergeant froze. He clearly knew how dangerous it was to have an excited twelve-year-old handling a powerful weapon.
Nor did Seldon feel much better. He said, "Careful, Raych. Dont shoot. Keep your finger off the contact."
"I aint gonna let him rush me."
"He wont.--Sergeant, please dont move. Lets get something straight. You were told to take me away from here. Is that right?"
"Thats right," said the sergeant, eyes somewhat protruding and firmly fixed on Raych (whose eyes were as firmly fixed on the sergeant). "But you were not told to take anyone else. Is that right?"
"No, I was not, Doctor," said the sergeant firmly. Not even the threat of a neuronic whip was going to make him weasel. One could see that.
"Very well, but listen to me, Sergeant. Were you told not to take anyone else?"
"I just said--"
"No, no. Listen, Sergeant. Theres a difference. Were your instructions simply Take Dr. Seldon!? Was that the entire order, with no mention of anyone else, or were the orders more specific? Were your orders as follows: Take Dr. Seldon and dont take anyone else?"
The sergeant turned that over in his head, then he said, "I was told to take you, Dr. Seldon."
"Then there was no mention of anyone else, one way or the other, was there?"
Pause. "No."
"You were not told to take Dr. Venabili, but you were not told not to take Dr. Venabili either. Is that right?"
Pause. "Yes."
"So you can either take her or not take her, whichever you please?"
Long pause. "I suppose so."
"Now then, heres Raych, the young fellow whos got a neuronic whip pointing at you--your neuronic whip, remember--and he is anxious to use it."
"Yay!" shouted Raych.
"Not yet, Raych," said Seldon. "And here is Dr. Venabili with two knives that she can use very expertly and theres myself, who can, if I get the chance, break your Adams apple with one hand so that youll never speak above a whisper again. Now then, do you want to take Dr. Venabili or dont you want to? Your orders allow you to do either."
And finally the sergeant said in a beaten voice, "I will take the woman."
"And the boy, Raych."
"And the boy."
"Good. Have I your word of honor--your word of honor as a soldier--that you will do as you have just said ... honestly?"
"You have my word of honor as a soldier," said the sergeant.
"Good. Raych, give back the whip.--Now.--Dont make me wait."
Raych, his face twisted into an unhappy grimace, looked at Dors, who hesitated and then slowly nodded her head. Her face was as unhappy as Raychs. Raych held out the neuronic whip to the sergeant and said, "Theyre makin me, ya big--" His last words were unintelligible.
Seldon said, "Put away your knives, Dors."
Dors shook her head, but put them away.
"Now, Sergeant?" said Seldon.
The sergeant looked at the neuronic whip, then at Seldon. He said, "You are an honorable man, Dr. Seldon, and my word of honor holds." With a military snap, he placed his neuronic whip in his holster.
Seldon turned to Davan and said, "Davan, please forget what you have seen here. We three are going voluntarily with Sergeant Thalus. You tell Yugo Amaryl when you see him that I will not forget him and that, once this is over and I am free to act, I will see that he gets into a University. And if theres anything reasonable I can ever do for your cause, Davan, I will.--Now, Sergeant, lets go."

第八十二章
第十七部 卫荷
卫荷：……川陀这个世界性都会的一区……在银河帝国最后的数世纪，卫荷是这个世界性都会中最强盛、最稳定的部分。它的领导者始终觊觎帝位。所持理由为他们是早期皇帝的后人。
在曼尼克斯四世统治下，卫荷整军经武，而且（帝国当局事后宣称）计划一场全球性军事政变……
——《银河百科全书》


第八十二章
进来的人，高头大马、肌肉结实。他有两撇很长的金色胡须，末端向上微微翘起；两绺发束从脸颊两侧垂下来，一直垂到颚下；下巴与下唇刮得光溜溜，看来似乎有点潮湿。他的头发修剪得非常短，而且由于颜色很淡，一时之间，令谢顿忆起了麦曲生的种种不快。
那人穿的无疑是一套制服。它的颜色红白相间，在腰际存一条宽大的皮带，上面装饰着几颗银质纽扣。
当他开口时，他的声音有如隆隆作响的低音乐器，口音听来非常陌生。在谢顿的经验中，不熟悉的口音大多听来相当粗鲁，但此人的声音却几乎像音乐，或许是醇厚的低音造成的印象。
“我是爱玛•塔勒斯中士，”他吐出低沉、浑厚丽缓慢的连续音节，“我来找哈里•谢顿博士。”
谢顿说：“我就是。”他别过头来，对铎丝低声说道：“如果夫铭无法亲自前来，他显然派了一个优秀的大块头代表他。”
中士对谢顿投以木然而稍嫌冗长的一眼，然后说：“没错，上级对我描述过你的容貌。请跟我走吧，谢顿博士。”
谢顿说：“带路。”
中士向后退去，谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里向前迈开脚步。
中士突然停下，举起一只巨大的手掌，掌心朝向铎丝：“上级指示我把哈里•谢顿博士接走，没有指示我带其他任何人。”
谢顿望着他，一时之间无法理解这是怎么回事。然后，他惊讶的神情转成了愤怒：“你不可能会接到这种指示。铎丝•凡纳比里博士是我的同事和同伴，她一定要跟我去。”
“这和我接到的指示不符，博士。”
“我根本不管你的什么指示，塔勒斯中士。不让她去的话，我一步也不走。”
“此外，”铎丝带着明显的怒意说：“我接到的指示，则是时时刻刻保护谢顿博上。除非我跟他在一起，否则我无法完成任务。因此，不论他到哪里，我都要跟去。”
中士看来十分为难：“我接到的指示，严格要求我确保你不会受到伤害，谢顿博士。如果你不肯自愿前去，我不得不抱你进入我的交通工具。我会试着动作尽量温和。”
他伸出两只手臂，仿佛要抓向谢顿的腰际，将他整个抱起来。
谢顿立刻向后一跃，让对方扑了个空。在他后退之际，他的右手掌击向中士的右臂上，刚好落在肌肉最少的位置，因此一举击中臂骨。
中士猛抽口气，身体似乎震了一下，但他随即转身，脸上毫无表情，再度向谢顿走去。达凡始终目不转睛，脚步没有丝毫移动．但芮奇已来到中士身后。
谢顿接二连二三重复他的掌击，但塔勒斯中士现在已有准备，他垂下肩头，让坚硬的肌肉承受这些攻击。
铎丝已将她的双刀拔出来。
“中士，”她强有力地说，“注意听好！我要你了解，假如你硬要试图强行带走谢顿博士，我也许不得不重伤你。”
中士顿了一下，仿佛严肃地估量着那两片缓缓挥动的利刃。然后他说：“我接到的指示，并未限制我伤害谢顿博士以外的任何人。”
他的右手以惊人的速度，向臀边皮套中的神经鞭伸去；铎丝飞快地挺进，双刀一齐刺出。
两人都没有完成动作。
芮奇猛然前冲，左手推向中士的背部，右手从皮套中抽走神经鞭。他飞快地闪了开去，用双手握着那柄武器，喊道：“举起手来，中士，否则你就要挨一记！‘，中士回旋转身，渐渐涨红的脸掠过一丝紧张的表情，这是他那木然的神态唯一减弱的一刻。“放下来，老弟。”他咆哮道，“你不知道怎么用。”
芮奇怒吼道：“我知道什么是保险开关，它现在开着，这东西可以发射。如果你试图向我冲来，它就真会发射。”
中士全身僵住。他显然知道，让一个激动的十二岁少年掌握一柄强力的武器有多危险。
谢顿的感受也好不了多少，他说：“小心，芮奇。不要发射，你的手指别碰开关。”
“我不会让他冲过来。”
“他不会的——中士，请别动，让我们把事情弄清楚。上级叫你把我带离这里，对吧？”
“对。”中士说，他的眼睛圆睁，紧紧盯在芮奇身上（后者的眼睛也同样紧紧盯在中士身上）。
“可是上级未曾叫你带其他人，是吗？”
“没有，我没接到这种指示，博士。”中士坚决地说。甚至神经鞭的威胁也无法逼使他改口，谁都能看出这点。
“很好，不过听我说，中士，上级曾叫你别带其他人吗？”
“我刚说过……”
“不，不，听好，中士，这有分别。你接到的指示只是‘带谢顿博士来’，整个指示就是这样，并未提到其他人，还是指示的内容更加特定？你接到的指示是不是‘带谢顿博士来，别带其他任何人’？”
中士的脑子转了几转，然后说：“上级叫我带你走，谢顿博士。”
“那么没有提到其他人，什么事都没提到，是不是？”
又顿了一下之后：“没有。”
“卜级没有叫你带凡纳比里博士走，但也没有叫你别带凡纳比里博士。是不是这样？”
顿了一下之后：“是的。”
“因此你可以带她也可以不带，随你高兴？”
停顿很长一段时间之后：“我想是的。”
“那么，这里站着芮奇。这位年轻朋友正拿着神经鞭指着你——记好，是你的神经鞭，而且他急着动用。”
“是啊！”芮奇喊道。
“还不要，芮奇。”谢顿说，“这里站着凡纳比里博士，手中握着两把刀，她是这种武器的大行家。此外还有我——我有能力乘机单手抓烂你的喉结，令你再也发不出比耳语更大的声音。现在，你要带凡纳比里博士同行，还是不要这样做？你的命令允许你做出选择。”
最后，中士以战败的声音说：“我会带这个女的走。”
“还有那个男孩，芮奇。”
“还有那个男孩。”
“很好。你对我以名誉担保吗？以一个军人的名誉担保，你会照你刚才说的去做……绝不耍诈？”
“我对你以一个军人的名誉担保。”中士说。
“很好。芮奇，把神经鞭还给他——赶快，别让我等。”
芮奇露出一副愁眉苦脸，转头向铎丝望去。铎丝犹豫了一下，然后缓缓点了点头，她的脸也像芮奇的一样凝重。
芮奇将神经鞭递给中士，并且说：“是他们要我这样做的，你这个大傻瓜。”最后两个字谁也听不懂。
谢顿说：“收起你的刀，铎丝。”
铎丝摇摇头，不过还是将双刀收了起来。
“好啦，中士？”谢顿说。
中士先望向神经鞭，然后又望向谢顿：“你是个可敬的人，谢顿博士，我的名誉担保一定算数。”他以利落的动作将神经鞭放回皮套中。
谢顿转头对达凡说：“达凡，请忘掉你在这里所见到的一切，我们三人是自愿随塔勒斯中士走的。当你见到雨果•阿马瑞尔时，告诉他我不会忘记他，一旦这件事告一段落，我能自由行动之后，我保证会送他进一所大学。而如果有任何合理的事，是我能为你做到的，达凡，我会做的——好啦，中士，我们走吧。”
Chapter 83
"Have you ever been in an air-jet before, Raych?" asked Hari Seldon.
Raych shook his head speechlessly. He was looking down at Upperside rushing beneath them with a mixture of fright and awe.
It struck Seldon again how much Trantor was a world of Expressways and tunnels. Even long trips were made underground by the general population. Air travel, however common it might be on the Outworlds, was a luxury on Trantor and an air-jet like this-- How had Hummin managed it? Seldon wondered.
He looked out the window at the rise and fall of the domes, at the general green in this area of the planet, the occasional patches of what were little less than jungles, the arms of the sea they occasionally passed over, with its leaden waters taking on a sudden all-too-brief sparkle when the sun peeped out momentarily from the heavy cloud layer.
An hour or so into the flight, Dors, who was viewing a new historical novel without much in the way of apparent enjoyment, clicked it off and said, "I wish I knew where weeeere going."
"If you cant tell," said Seldon, "then I certainly cant. Youve been on Trantor longer than I have."
"Yes, but only on the inside," said Dors. "Out here, with only Upperside below me, Im as lost as an unborn infant would be."
"Oh well.--Presumably, Hummin knows what hes doing."
"Im sure he does," replied Dors rather tartly, "but that may have nothing to do with the present situation. Why do you continue to assume any of this represents his initiative?"
Seldons eyebrows lifted. "Now that you ask, I dont know. I just assumed it. Why shouldnt this be his?"
"Because whoever arranged it didnt specify that I be taken along with you. I simply dont see Hummin forgetting my existence. And because he didnt come himself, as he did at Streeling and at Mycogen."
"You cant always expect him to, Dors. He might well be occupied. The astonishing thing is not that he didnt come on this occasion but that he did come on the previous ones."
"Assuming he didnt come himself, would he send a conspicuous and lavish flying palace like this?" She gestured around her at the large luxurious jet.
"It might simply have been available. And he might have reasoned that no one would expect something as noticeable as this to be carrying fugitives who were desperately trying to avoid detection. The well-known double-double-cross."
"Too well-known, in my opinion. And would he send an idiot like Sergeant Thalus in his place?"
"The sergeant is no idiot. Hes simply been trained to complete obedience. With proper instructions, he could be utterly reliable."
"There you are, Hari. We come back to that. Why didnt he get proper instructions? Its inconceivable to me that Chetter Hummin would tell him to carry you out of Dahl and not say a word about me. Inconceivable."
And to that Seldon had no anseer and his spirits sank.
Another hour passed and Dors said, "It looks as if its getting colder outside. The green of Upperside is turning brown and I believe the heaters have turned on."
"What does that signify?"
"Dahl is in the tropic zone so obviously were going either north or south--and a considerable distance too. If I had some notion in which direction the nightline was I could tell which."
Eventually, they passed over a section of shoreline where there was a rim of ice hugging the domes where they were rimmed by the sea. And then, quite unexpectedly, the air-jet angled downward.
Raych screamed, "Were goin to hit! Were goin to smash up!"
Seldons abdominal muscles tightened and he clutched the arms of his seat. Dors seemed unaffected.
She said, "The pilots up front dont seem alarmed. Well be tunneling."
And, as she said so, the jets wings swept backward and under it and, like a bullet, the air-jet entered a tunnel. Blackness swept back over them in an instant and a moment later the lighting system in the tunnel turned on. The walls of the tunnel snaked past the jet on either side.
"I dont suppose Ill ever be sure they know the tunnel isnt already occupied," muttered Seldon.
"Im sure they had reassurance of a clear tunnel some dozens of kilometers earlier," said Dors. "At any rate, I presume this is the last stage of the journey and soon well know where we are."
She paused and then added, "And I further presume we wont like the knowledge when we have it."
第八十三章
　　“你以前搭乘过喷射机吗，芮奇？”哈里•谢顿问道。
芮奇默默摇了摇头。他正带着惊恐与敬畏交集的心情，望着穹顶猛然从他们脚底掠过。
这使谢顿再度想到，川陀是个多么依赖磁浮捷运与隧道的世界。对一般大众而言，即使长距离旅行也都在地底进行。不论空中旅行在外星世界多么普遍，它在川陀却是一项奢侈。至于像这样一架喷射机……
夫铭是怎样做到的？谢顿实在纳闷。
他透过机窗向外望去，看见了起伏的穹顶，看见了这一带的无际苍翠，以及偶尔出现、无异于丛林的深绿色斑点，还有不时掠过的一些海湾——当太阳从浓厚的云层中暂时露脸时，铅色的海水便会在一瞬间闪闪发光。
铎丝本来在看一本新的历史小说，没有显露多大的兴趣。飞行了大约一小时之后，她突然将胶卷书“喀哒”一声关掉，开口说道：“我希望知道我们正往哪儿去。”
“如果你无法判断，”谢顿说，“那我当然更不行。你在川陀待得比我久。”
“没错，不过只是在里面。”铎丝说，“到了外面这里，只有穹顶在我脚下，我就像腹中的婴儿一般茫然。”
“喔，好吧。想必，夫铭知道他在做什么。”
“我确定他知道，”铎丝以颇为坚信的语气答道，“但那或许和现在的情势毫无关系。你为什么还是认为这些都是他谋划的？”
谢顿扬起眉毛：“被你这么一问，我实在不知道，我只是假设而已。为什么不该是呢？”
“因为不论是谁安排这项行动，都没有特别指示带我和你起走，我就是不信夫铭会忘记我。而且他这次并未亲自前来，像前两次在斯璀璘和麦曲生那样。”
“你不能总是期望他那样做，铎丝，他很可能是分身乏术。应该惊讶的不是这回他没来，而是前两次他竟然来了。”
“假若他无法亲自前来，他会派一个这么显眼、这么高贵的飞行宫殿来吗？”她四下指了指这架大型豪华喷射机。
“也许它只不过是刚好能派上用场。而且他也许做过一番推理，认为没有人会怀疑像这么显眼的东西，会载着两个拼命想要躲避耳目的逃亡者。这就是出了名的负负得正。”
“这也未免太夸张了。他怎么会派个像塔勒斯中士这样的白痴来？”
“这位中士不是白痴，他只足破训练得绝对服从。只要有适当的指示，他百分之百可靠。”
“你看，哈里，我们又兜回来了。为什么他没得到适当的指示？我感到实在不可思议，契特•夫铭竟然只告诉他把你带离达尔，却没有一个字提到我。实在不可思议。”
对于这个问题，谢顿没有任何答案，他的心开始往下沉。
又过了一小时之后，铎丝说：“看来外面好像越来越冷，穹顶上原本青翠的景色已变得枯黄，而且我相信暖气已经打开。”
“这代表什么意义？”
“达尔位于热带，所以显然我们正在向北或向南飞——而且飞了很可观的距离。假如我对昼夜界限在哪个方向有些概念，我便能判断是南是北。’’最后，他们通过一道海岸线，那些滨海穹顶与海水接壤处紧贴着一串冰。
然后，在几乎毫无预兆的情况下，喷射机开始俯冲。
芮奇尖叫道：“我们要坠毁啦！我们会撞得粉碎！”
谢顿感到腹肌收紧，他用力抓住座椅扶手。
铎丝似乎不为所动，她说：“前面的驾驶员似乎并不惊慌，我想，我们是要钻进隧道里。”
就在她这么说的时候，机翼已经开始向后、向下收拢，接着，喷射机就像一颗子弹一样进入隧道。最初的一刹那，他们被一片黑暗笼罩；下一刻，隧道内的照明系统便已开启。从喷射机向外望，隧道两旁的墙壁正蜿蜒地掠过机身。
“我想我永远不会弄懂，他们是怎么知道这条隧道已经空出来。”训顿喃喃说道。
“我确定在好几十公里外，他们便已确认过无人使用。”铎丝说，“无论如何，我推测这是此趟旅程的最后一站，我们很快会知道身在何处。”
她顿了一顿，然后补充道：“而且我还有个预感，在我们知道后，我们不会喜欢那个答案。”
Chapter 84

The air-jet sped out of the tunnel and onto a long runway with a roof so high that it seemed closer to true daylight than anything Seldon had seen since he had left the Imperial Sector.
They came to a halt in a shorter time than Seldon would have expected, but at the price of an uncomfortable pressure forward. Raych, in particular, was crushed against the seat before him and was finding it difficult to breathe till Dorss hand on his shoulder pulled him back slightly.
Sergeant Thalus, impressive and erect, left the jet and moved to the rear, where he opened the door of the passenger compartment and helped the three out, one by one.
Seldon was last. He half-turned as he passed the sergeant, saying, "It was a pleasant trip, Sergeant."
A slow smile spread over the sergeants large face and lifted his mustachioed upper lip. He touched the visor of his cap in what was half a salute and said, "Thank you again, Doctor."
They were then ushered into the backseat of a ground-car of lavish design and the sergeant himself pushed into the front seat and drove the vehicle with a surprisingly light touch.
They passed through wide roadways, flanked by tall, well-designed buildings, all glistening in broad daylight. As elsewhere on Trantor, they heard the distant drone of an Expressway. The walkways were crowded with what were, for the most part, well-dressed people. The surroundings were remarkably--almost excessively--clean.
Seldons sense of security sank further. Dorss misgivings concerning their destination now seemed justified after all. He leaned toward her and said, "Do you think we are back in the Imperial Sector?"
She said, "No, the buildings are more rocooo in the Imperial Sector and theres less Imperial parkishness to this sector--if you know what I mean."
"Then where are we, Dors?
"Well have to ask, Im afraid, Hari."
It was not a long trip and soon they rolled into a car-bay that flanked an imposing four-story structure. A frieze of imaginary animals ran along the top, decorated with strips of warm pink stone. It was an impressive facade with a rather pleasing design.
Seldon said, "That certainly looks rocooo enough."
Dors shrugged uncertainly.
Raych whistled and said in a failing attempt to sound unimpressed, "Hey, look at that fancy place."
Sergeant Thalus gestured to Seldon clearly indicating that he was to follow. Seldon hung back and, also relying on the universal language of gesture, held out both arms, clearly including Dors and Raych. The sergeant hesitated in a slightly hangdog fashion at the impressive pink doorway. His mustache almost seemed to droop.
Then he said gruffly, "All three of you, then. My word of honor holds.--Still, others may not feel obligated by my own obligation, you know."
Seldon nodded. "I hold you responsible for your own deeds only, Sergeant."
The sergeant was clearly moved and, for a moment, his face lightened as though he was considering the possibility of shaking Seldons hand or expressing heartfelt his approval in some other way. He decided against it, however, and stepped onto the bottom step of the flight that led to the door. The stairs immediately began a stately upward movement.
Seldon and Dors stepped after him at once and kept their balance without much trouble. Raych, who was momentarily staggered in surprise, jumped onto the moving stairs after a short run, shoved both hands into his pockets, and whistled carelessly.
The door opened and two women stepped out, one on either side in symmetrical fashion. They were young and attractive. Their dresses, belted tightly about the waist and reaching nearly to their ankles, fell in crisp pleats and rustled when they walked. Both had brown hair that was coiled in thick plaits on either side of their heads. (Seldon found it attractive, but wondered how long it took them each morning to arrange it just so. He had not been aware of so elaborate a coiffure on the women they had passed in the streets.) The two women stared at the newcomers with obvious contempt. Seldon was not surprised. After the days events, he and Dors looked almost as disreputable as Raych.
Yet the women managed to bow decorously and then made a half-turn and gestured inward in perfect unison and with symmetry carefully maintained. (Did they rehearse these things?) It was clear that the three were to enter. They stepped through an elaborate room, cluttered with furniture and decorative items whose use Seldon did not readily understand. The floor was light-colored, springy, and glowed with luminescence. Seldon noted with some embarrassment that their footwear left dusty marks upon it.
And then an inner door was flung open and yet another woman emerged. She was distinctly older than the first two (who sank slowly as she came in, crossing their legs symmetrically as they did so in a way that made Seldon marvel that they could keep their balance; it undoubtedly took a deal of practice). Seldon wondered if he too was expected to display some ritualized form of respect, but since he hadnt the faintest notion of what this might consist of, he merely bowed his head slightly. Dors remained standing erect and, it seemed to Seldon, did so with disdain. Raych was staring open-mouthed in all directions and looked as though he didnt even see the woman who had just entered. She was plump--not fat, but comfortably padded. She wore her hair precisely as the young ladies did and her dress was in the same style, but much more richly ornamented--too much so to suit Seldons aesthetic notions. She was clearly middle-aged and there was a hint of gray in her hair, but the dimples in her cheeks gave her the appearance of having rather more than a dash of youth. Her light brown eyes were merry and on the whole she looked more motherly than old.
She said, "How are you? All of you." (She showed no surprise at the presence of Dors and Raych, but included them easily in her greeting.) "Ive been waiting for you for some time and almost had you on Upperside at Streeling. You are Dr. Hari Seldon, whom Ive been looking forward to meeting. You, I think, must be Dr. Dors Venabili, for you had been reported to be in his company. This young man I fear I do not know, but I am pleased to see him. But we must not spend our time talking, for Im sure you would like to rest first."
"And bathe, Madam," said Dors rather forcefully, "Each of us could use a thorough shower."
"Yes, certainly," said the woman, "and a change in clothing. Especially the young man." She looked down at Raych without any of the look of contempt and disapproval that the two young women had shown. She said, "What is your name, young man?"
"Raych," said Raych in a rather choked and embarrassed voice. He then added experimentally, "Missus."
"What an odd coincidence," said the woman, her eyes sparkling. "An omen, perhaps. My own name is Rashelle. Isnt that odd?--But come. We shall take care of you all. Then there will be plenty of time to have dinner and to talk."
"Wait, Madam," said Dors. "May I ask where we are?"
"Wye, dear. And please call me Rashelle, as you come to feel more friendly. I am always at ease with informality."
Dors stiffened. "Are you surprised that we ask? Isnt it natural that we should want to know where we are?"
Rashelle laughed in a pleasant, tinkling manner. "Really, Dr. Venabili, something must be done about the name of this place. I was not asking a question but making a statement. You asked where you were and I did not ask you why. I told you, Wye. You are in the Wye Sector."
"In Wye?" said Seldon forcibly.
"Yes indeed, Dr. Seldon. Weve wanted you from the day you addressed the Decennial Convention and we are so glad to have you now."
第八十四章
　　喷射机急速飞出隧道，降落在一条很长的跑道上。跑道穹顶上有个非常高的顶棚，自从谢顿离开皇区后，从未见过如此接近真实天日的建筑。
他们不久便停下来，滑行的时问比谢顿预期的还短，不过代价是一股难受的正向冲力。尤其是芮奇，他全身压在前座的椅背上，连呼吸都很困难，直到铎丝放在他肩头的手将他稍向后拉，他才总算松了一口气。
相貌堂堂、身形笔挺的塔勒斯中士离开喷射帆前座，向后面走过来。他打开旅客舱的舱门，扶助他们二人一个个下机。
谢顿最后一个下机。当他经过中士身边时，半转过头来说：“这是一趟愉快的旅程，中士。”
一抹笑容在中士宽大的脸庞缓缓扩散，使他留着胡子的上唇扬了起来。他像敬礼似的碰了一下帽檐，说道：“再次谢谢你，博士。”
接着，他们在引导之下，进入一辆外观华贵的地面车的后座。中士自己钻进前座，以惊人的轻巧动作驾驶着这辆车。
他们穿过几条宽阔的道路，两侧都是高大、壮丽的建筑，全都在充足的日光下闪闪发亮。如同在川陀其他各处一样，他们听到远处有磁浮捷运的嗡嗡声。人行道上挤满了人，大多数穿得很体面。周遭的环境十分清洁，几乎可说清洁得过分。
谢顿的安全感再度下沉。铎丝对于目的地的忧心，如今似乎终于应验。他靠近她说：“你认为我们回到皇区了吗？”
她说：“不。皇区的建筑更具洛可可风格，而本区的庭园皇家风味较少——你该知道我的意思。”
“那么我们在哪里，铎丝？”
“只怕我们得问问，哈里。”
这不是一趟长途旅程，他们很快就来到一个停车坪，旁边是一座富丽堂皇的四层楼建筑。建筑物顶端横亘一道壁缘，上面雕刻着许多想象中的动物，并装饰着粉红暖色的石头排成的条纹。建筑物的外表极为壮观，拥有一个讨人喜欢的外形。
谢顿说：“那看来无疑是洛可可风格。”
铎丝不确定地耸了耸肩。
芮奇吹着口哨，企图表现得毫不在乎：“嘿，看看那个拉风的地方。”不过他装得有点勉强。
塔勒斯中土对谢顿做了一个手势，显然是要他跟着走。谢顿却裹足不前，他伸出双臂，同样借着这种世界通用的语言，明显地表示垃将铎丝与芮奇包括在内。
在壮观的粉红色大门口，中士有点谦卑地迟疑了一下，他的两撇胡子好像几乎要垂下来。
然后他板着脸说：“那么，你们三个一起来吧，我的名誉担保仍然算数。话说回来，你该知道，其他人也许不会认同我。”
谢顿点了点头：“我坚信你一定会对自己的行为负责，中士。”
中士显然有些感动，一时之间，他的脸孔开朗许多，仿佛在考虑该与谢顿握握手，或是以其他方式表达他的衷心赞同。然而，他终究抑止了这些冲动，径自踏上门前台阶的最低一级。那道阶梯立刻开始庄严地缓缓上升。
谢顿与铎丝赶紧随他踏上阶梯，没费多大力气便稳住身形。芮奇惊讶之余曾有短暂的踌躇，经过短距离冲刺才跳上这个活动阶梯。然后他将双手插进口袋，悠闲地吹起口哨。
大门打开后，随即出现两名年轻迷人的女子，以对称的方式各自从一边走出来。她们的衣裳在腰际有皮带紧紧系住，下摆几乎长达脚踝，末端有波浪状的皱褶，走路时会沙沙作响。两人都有一头棕发，在头部两侧结成两条粗辫。（谢顿发觉那很吸引人，却又纳闷她们每天早上得花多少时间梳理。刚才一路上。他并未发觉街上的妇女有如此精致的发型。）
两名女子以明显的轻蔑眼光凝视来客。这点谢顿并不惊讶，经过一天的折腾，他与铎丝看来几乎跟芮奇一样灰头土脸。
然而，两名女子还是以优雅的动作鞠了一躬，然后半转过身，以完美的一致动作向内做个手势，显然是要他们三人进去，动作从头到尾都细心维持着对称。（她们预演过这些事吗？）
他们穿过一个精致的房间，其中零星散布着家具与装饰品，谢顿无法一眼看出它们的功用。地板是浅色的，富有弹性并发出冷光。谢顿注意到三人的鞋子在上面留下不少灰尘，令他感到有些不好意思。
然后，内门突然被推开，随即出现另一名女子，她比先前那两位无疑年长许多。（当她走出来时，两名少女缓缓低下身子，双脚始终维持对称的交叉姿势。谢顿不禁赞叹她们竟然能保持平衡，这无疑需要大量的练习。）
谢顿不知自已是否也该做出某种礼仪性的姿势，但他对这一切毫无概念，他只好微微点了点头。铎丝则保持直立的姿势，在谢顿的感觉中，她的动作似乎带着不屑的意味。芮奇正张大嘴巴东张西望，甚至没注意到刚进来的那名女子。
她的体型丰满——并非肥胖，只有适度的脂肪。她将头发梳成与两名少女同样的发型。她的衣裳也是同一种款式，不过装饰要华丽许多——实在太多了点，令谢倾的审美眼光无法接受。
她显然已步入中年，头发透出些许灰白，但面颊是的两个酒涡为她的外表带来不少青春气息，淡褐色的眼睛也神采奕奕。整体而言，她看来不算老，较像一位慈母。
她说：“你们大家好吗？”（她对铎丝与芮奇的存在末表现惊讶，而且在问候中轻易地将他们包括在内。）“我等待你已有一些时日，当初在斯璀璘的穹顶上差点就请到你。你是哈里•谢顿博士，是我一直期待会见的人。而你，我想，一定是铎丝•凡纳比里博士，因为根据报告，你一直是他的同伴。这个年轻人我恐怕不认识，不过我很高兴见到他。但我们绝不可花太多时间交谈，因为我确定你们希望先休息一下。”
“还有沐浴，夫人，”铎丝以颇为有力的口气说：“我们每个人都得好好洗个澡。”
“是的，当然。”那女子说，“还要换一套衣服，尤其这个年轻人。”她低头望向芮奇，与那两名少女不同的是，她脸上没有任何轻视或不以为然的表情。
她说：“你叫什么名字，年轻人？”
“芮奇，”芮奇以有些嘶哑与尴尬的声音说，接着又试探性地加上称呼，“姑奶奶。”
“多么奇妙的巧合，”那女子说，她的双眼闪烁着光芒。“或许是个兆头。我自己的名字是芮喜尔，这是不是很奇妙？不过别管这个了，我们会好好照顾你们。然后，我们有充分的时间晚餐和叙谈。”
“等一等，女士。”铎丝说，“我能请问我们在哪里吗？”
“卫荷，亲爱的。等你感到更熟悉时，请改口叫我芮喜尔。我总是喜欢不拘礼节。”
铎丝的态度转趋强硬：“‘为何？’我们发问令你惊讶吗？我们想要知道身在何处，这难道不是很自然吗？”
芮喜尔发出一阵愉悦而清脆的笑声：“真的，凡纳比里博士，这地方的名字好歹也得改一改。我并非提出一个问题，而是在做一项陈述。你问你们在哪里，我不是问你‘为何’，而是告诉你‘卫荷’。你们如今在卫荷区。”
“在卫荷？”谢顿使劲说道。
“的确没错，谢顿博士。打从你在十年会议上发表演说那天起，我们就想要把你请来，我们很高兴现在终于得到你了。”
Chapter 85

Actually, it took a full day to rest and unstiffen, to wash and get clean, to obtain new clothes (satiny and rather loose, in the style of Wye), and to sleep a good deal.
It was during the second evening in Wye that there was the dinner that Madam Rashelle had promised.
The table was a large one--too large, considering that there were only four dining: Hari Seldon, Dors Venabili, Raych, and Rashelle. The walls and ceiling were softly illuminated and the colors changed at a rate that caught the eye but not so rapidly as in any way to discommode the mind. The very tablecloth, which was not cloth (Seldon had not made up his mind what it might be), seemed to sparkle.
The servers were many and silent and when the door opened it seemed to Seldon that he caught a glimpse of soldiers, armed and at the ready, outside. The room was a velvet glove, but the iron fist was not far distant. Rashelle was gracious and friendly and had clearly taken a particular liking to Raych, who, she insisted, was to sit next to her. Raych--scrubbed, polished, and shining, all but unrecognizable in his new clothes, with his hair clipped, cleaned, and brushed--scarcely dared to say a word. It was as though he felt his grammar no longer fit his appearance. He was pitifully ill at ease and he watched Dors carefully as she switched from utensil to utensil, trying to match her exactly in every respect. The food was tasty but spicy--to the point where Seldon could not recognize the exact nature of the dishes.
Rashelle, her plump face made happy by her gentle smile and her fine teeth gleaming white, said, "You may think we have Mycogenian additives in the food, but we do not. It is all homegrown in Wye. There is no sector on the planet more self-sufficient than Wye. We labor hard to keep that so."
Seldon nodded gravely and said, "Everything you have given us is first-rate, Rashelle. We are much obliged to you."
And yet within himself he thought the food was not quite up to Mycogenian standards and he felt moreover, as he had earlier muttered to Dors, that he was celebrating his own defeat. Or Hummins defeat, at any rate, and that seemed to him to be the same thing.
After all, he had been captured by Wye, the very possibility that had so concerned Hummin at the time of the incident Upperside. Rashelle said, "Perhaps, in my role as hostess, I may be forgiven if I ask personal questions. Am I correct in assuming that you three do not represent a family; that you, Hari, and you, Dors, are not married and that Raych is not your son?"
"The three of us are not related in any way," said Seldon. "Raych was born on Trantor, I on Helicon, Dors on Cinna."
"And how did you all meet, then?"
Seldon explained briefly and with as little detail as he could manage. "Theres nothing romantic or significant in the meetings," he added.
"Yet I am given to understand that you raised difficulties with my personal aide, Sergeant Thalus, when he wanted to take only you out of Dahl."
Seldon said gravely, "I had grown fond of Dors and Raych and did not wish to be separated from them."
Rashelle smiled and said, "You are a sentimental man, I see."
"Yes, I am. Sentimental. And puzzled too."
"Puzzled?"
"Why yes. And since you were so kind as to ask personal questions of us, may I ask one as well?"
"Of course, my dear Hari. Ask anything you please."
"When we first arrived, you said that Wye has wanted me from the day I addressed the Decennial Convention. For what reason might that be?"
"Surely, you are not so simple as not to know. We want you for your psychohistory."
"That much I do understand. But what makes you think that having me means you have psychohistory?"
"Surely, you have not been so careless as to lose it."
"Worse, Rashelle. I have never had it."
Rashelles face dimpled. "But you said you had it in your talk. Not that I understood your talk. I am not a mathematician. I hate numbers. But I have in my employ mathematicians who have explained to me what it is you said."
"In that case, my dear Rashelle, you must listen more closely. I can well imagine they have told you that I have proven that psychohistorical predictions are conceivable, but surely they must also have told you that they are not practical."
"I cant believe that, Hari. The very next day, you were called into an audience with that pseudo-Emperor, Cleon."
"The pseudo-Emperor?" murmured Dors ironically.
"Why yes," said Rashelle as though she was answering a serious question. "Pseudo-Emperor. He has no true claim to the throne."
"Rashelle," said Seldon, brushing that aside a bit impatiently, "I told Cleon exactly what I have just told you and he let me go."
Now Rashelle did nor smile. A small edge crept into her voice. "Yes, he let you go the way the cat in the fable lets a mouse go. He has been pursuing you ever since--in Streeling, in Mycogen, in Dahl. He would pursue you here if he dared. But come now--our serious talk is too serious. Let us enjoy ourselves. Let us have music."
And at her words, there suddenly sounded a soft but joyous instrumental melody. She leaned toward Raych and said softly, "My boy, if you are not at ease with the fork, use your spoon or your fingers. I wont mind."
Raych said, "Yes, mum," and swallowed hard, but Dors caught his eye and her lips silently mouthed: "Fork."
He remained with his fork.
Dors said, "The music is lovely, Madam"--she pointedly rejected the familiar form of address "but it must not he allowed to distract us. There is the thought in my mind that the pursuer in all those places might have been in the employ of the Wye Sector. Surely, you would not be so well acquainted with events if Wye were not the prime mover."
Rashelle laughed aloud. "Wye has its eyes and ears everywhere, of course, but we were not the pursuers. Had we been, you would have been picked up without fail--as you were in Dahl finally when, indeed, we were the pursuers. When, however, there is a pursuit that fails, a grasping hand that misses, you may be sure that it is Demerzel."
"Do you think so little of Demerzel?" murmured Dors.
"Yes. Does that surprise you? We have beaten him."
"You? Or the Wye Sector?"
"The sector, of course, but insofar as Wye is the victor, then I am the victor."
"How strange," said Dors. "There seems to be a prevalent opinion throughout Trantor that the inhabitants of Wye have nothing to do with victory, with defeat, or with anything else. It is felt that there is but one will and one fist in Wye and that is that of the Mayor. Surely, you--or any other Wyan--weigh nothing in comparison."
Rashelle smiled broadly. She paused to look at Raych benevolently and to pinch his cheek, then said, "If you believe that our Mayor is an autocrat and that there is but one will that sways Wye, then perhaps you are right. But, even so, I can still use the personal pronoun, for my will is of account."
"Why yours?" said Seldon.
"Why not?" said Rashelle as the servers began clearing the table. "I am the Mayor of Wye."
第八十五章
　　事实上，休息、松弛，把全身洗干净，换上新衣服（质料光滑且有些宽松，这是卫荷服装的特色），再好好睡上一觉，花了他们一整天的时间。
来到卫荷的第二天傍晚，芮喜尔女士说好的晚餐才有机会举行。
餐桌相当大——其实太大了，因为总其只有四个人进餐：哈里•谢顿、铎丝•凡纳比里、芮奇与芮喜尔。墙壁与屋顶都打上柔和的灯光，光线的色彩不停变化，其速率足以吸引目光，却不至于使人心浮气躁。而桌布（其实并非布料，谢顿心中尚未判定它是什么）似乎会闪闪发亮。
服侍进餐的仆人很多，全都沉默不语。当门打开的时候，谢顿似乎瞥见外面站着一些士兵，一律全副武装并荷枪实弹。这个房间就像个天鹅绒手套，那只铁拳却在不远的地方。
芮喜尔表现得殷勤而亲切，而且显然对芮奇特别喜爱，还坚持要他坐在旁边。
芮奇已经彻底洗干净，显得焕然一新。穿上新衣服，头发经过修剪、清洗、梳理之后，几乎使人认不出他来。现在他简直不敢说一个字，似乎感到他的文法不再符合自己的外表。他觉得自卑而不自在，每当铎丝的手在餐具间游移，他都会仔细望着她，试图每一方面都与她的动作完全一致：
食物可口但味道过重，以致谢顿无法分辨每道荣究竟是什么做的。
芮喜尔带着温柔的微笑，令她丰满的脸颊显得很开心．她美丽的牙齿闪着雪白的晶光。“你也许以为我们在食物中放了麦曲生添加物，其实我们没有，这些全是卫荷自己种植的。在这颗行星上，没有任何一区比卫荷更自给自足：我们花费很大心力保持如此。”
谢顿严肃地点了点头：“你招待我们的每样东西部是一流的，芮喜尔，我们十分感谢你。”
然而在他心中，却认为这些食物还是比不上麦曲生的水平。他更有一种感觉，正如他早先对铎丝说过的，他正在庆祝自己的失败。或者至少是夫锦的失败，而在他看来，这两者似乎是同一回事。
到头来，他还是被卫荷逮捕。当初，在穹顶上的事件发生后，夫铭曾经非常担心这个可能性。
芮喜尔说：“或许，我既然身为女主人，如果问些私人问题也请原凉。我猜测你们三位不是一家人；你，哈里，和你，铎丝，不是夫妻，而芮奇不是你们的儿子，这个猜测是否正确？”
“我们三个人没有任何关系，”谢顿说．“芮奇生在川陀，我生在赫利肯。铎丝生在锡纳。”
“那么，你们三人是怎样相遇的？”
谢顿做了简短的解释，尽可能不提任何细节。“相遇的过程没有任何浪漫或重要的情节。”他补充道。
“然而据我了解，当我的贴身侍卫——塔勒斯中士，只要将你一人带离达尔时，你曾对他百般刁难。”
谢顿以严肃的口吻说：“我越来越喜欢铎丝和芮奇，不希望跟他们分开。”
芮喜尔微微一笑：“我懂了，你是个感情丰富的男人。”
“没错，我的确是。感情丰富，而且十分困惑。”
“困惑？”
“可不是吗。既然你这么亲切，问了我们一些私人问题，我是否也能反问你一个问题？”
“当然，亲爱的哈里，你喜欢问什么都行。”
“当我们刚抵达的时候，你说打从我在十年会议上发表演说那天起，卫荷就想要把我请来。这是为了什么？”
“哦，你不会单纯到连这点都不知道。我们要你是为了你的心理史学。”
“这点我还了解。然而是什么使你认为，得到我就代表得到心理史学？”
“不用说，你不会粗心到把它给弄丢了。”
“事实上更糟，芮喜尔，我从未拥有它。”
芮喜尔脸上现出酒涡：“但你在演说中曾说你拥有它。并非我听得懂你的演说，我不是数学家，我痛恨数字。可是我雇用了不少数学家，他们对我解释过你所说的内容。”
“这样说来，亲爱的芮喜尔，你必须听得更仔细些。我绝对能想象他们曾经告诉你，说我证明出心理史学的预测是可能的，但他们当然也告诉过你，那实际上是不可行的。”
“我不相信，哈里。第二天你就被召见，去觐见那个伪皇帝，克里昂。”
“伪皇帝？”铎丝以讽刺的口吻喃喃说道。
“可不是吗。”芮喜尔仿佛在回答一个严肃的问题，“伪皇帝，他没有继承皇位的真正资格。”
“芮喜尔，”谢顿有点不耐烦地把那个问题推到一边，“我告诉克里昂的话，和我刚才对你说的一模一样，然后他就让我走了。”
这回阿喜尔并未露出笑容，她的声音变得有点尖锐：“没错，他让你走了，以寓言中猫放老鼠走的那种方式。从此以后，他就一直在追捕你——在斯璀璘，在麦曲生，在达尔。要是他有胆的话，他还会追到这里来。不过别谈这些了——我们的严肃话题变得太严肃了。让我们享受一下，来点音乐吧。”
话音刚落，便突然响起轻柔悦耳的乐器旋律。她倚向芮奇，轻声说道：“孩子，如果你用叉子感到不自在，就用你的汤匙，或是用手指，我不会介意。”
芮奇说：“好的，女士。”而且毫无保留地接受了。
但铎丝捕捉到他的目光，并做出一组无声的嘴形：“叉了。”
于是他没将叉子丢开。
铎丝说：“这音乐真可爱，女士。”她刻意拒绝用亲昵的称呼，“可是它一定不能使我们开心。我心中有个想法，就是各处的追捕者可能都受雇于卫荷区。不用说，假如卫荷不是主谋，你也不会对那些事件了如指掌。”
芮喜尔纵声大笑：“当然，卫荷的耳目遍布各个角落，但我们不是追捕者。若是我们的话，你们早就被一举捉来了——就像你们在达尔时那样，那一次，我们终于真正成为追捕者。然而，当追捕的行动失败、伸出的爪子抓空时，你便可确定那是丹莫茨尔主使的。”
“你如此看轻丹莫茨尔？”铎丝喃喃问道。
“是的，这令你惊讶吗？我们击败了他。”
“你？或是卫荷区？”
“当然是奉区，但只要卫荷是胜利者，那么我就是胜利者。”
“多奇怪啊，”铎丝说，“整个川陀似乎盛行着一种见解，那就是卫荷的居民和胜利、失败，或是任何其他事情都毫无关系。在我们的感觉中，卫荷只有一个意志，一只拳头，而那是属于区长所有。不用说，你，或者其他卫荷人，比较之下根本无足轻重。”
芮喜尔露出开怀的笑容。她没有立即叫答，向是以慈祥的眼光望向芮奇，又掐掐他的脸颊，这才说道：“如果你相信我们的区长是个独裁者，而且，只有一个意志支配着卫荷，那么或许你是对的。可是，即使如此，我仍有资格用人称代词代表卫荷，因为我的意志举足轻重。”
“为什么？”谢顿说。
“为什么不呢？”当仆人开始收拾餐桌时，芮喜尔说，“我，就是卫荷区长。”
Chapter 86
It was Raych who was the first to react to the statement.
Quite forgetting the cloak of civility that sat upon him so uncomfortably, he laughed raucously and said, "Hey, lady, ya cant be Mayor. Mayors is guys."
Rashelle looked at him good-naturedly and said in a perfect imitation of his tone of voice, "Hey, kid, some Mayors is guys and some Mayors is dames. Put that under your lid and let it bubble."
Raychs eyes protruded and he seemed stunned. Finally he managed to say, "Hey, ya talk regular, lady."
"Sure thing. Regular as ya want," said Rashelle, still smiling.
Seldon cleared his throat and said, "Thats quite an accent you have, Rashelle."
Rashelle tossed her head slightly. "I havent had occasion to use it in many years, but one never forgets. I once had a friend, a good friend, who was a Dahlite--when I was very young." She sighed. "He didnt speak that way, of course--he was quite intelligent--but he could do so if he wished and he taught me. It was exciting to talk so with him. It created a world that excluded our surroundings. It was wonderful. It was also impossible. My father made that plain. And now along comes this young rascal, Raych, to remind me of those long-ago days. He has the accent, the eyes, the impudent cast of countenance, and in six years or so he will be a delight and terror to the young women. Wont you, Raych?"
Raych said, "I dunno, lady--uh, mum."
"Im sure you will and you will come to look very much like my ... old friend and it will be much more comfortable for me not to see you then. And now, dinners over and its time for you to go to your room, Raych. You can watch holovision for a while if you wish. I dont suppose you read."
Raych reddened. "Im gonna read someday. Master Seldon says Im gonna."
"Then Im sure you will."
A young woman approached Raych, curtsying respectfully in Rashelles direction.
Seldon had not seen the signal that had summoned her.
Raych said, "Cant I stay with Master Seldon and Missus Venabili?"
"Youll see them later," said Rashelle gently, "but Master and Missus and I have to talk right now--so you must go."
Dors mouthed a firm "Go!" at Raych and with a grimace the boy slid out of his chair and followed the attendant.
Rashelle turned to Seldon and Dors once Raych was gone and said, "The boy will be safe, of course, and treated well. Please have no fears about that. And I will be safe too. As my woman approached just now, so will a dozen armed men--and much more rapidly--when summoned. I want you to understand that."
Seldon said evenly, "We are in no way thinking of attacking you, Rashelle--or must I now say, Madam Mayor?"
"Still Rashelle. I am given to understand that you are a wrestler of sorts, Hari, and you, Dors, are very skillful with the knives we have removed from your room. I dont want you to rely uselessly on your skills, since I want Hari alive, unharmed, and friendly."
"It is quite well understood, Madam Mayor," said Dors, her lack of friendship uncompromised, "that the ruler of Wye, now and for the past forty years, is Mannix, Fourth of that Name, and that he is still alive and in full possession of his faculties. Who, then, are you really?"
"Exactly who I say I am, Dors. Mannix IV is my father. He is, as you say, still alive and in possession of his faculties. In the eyes of the Emperor and of all the Empire, he is Mayor of Wye, but he is weary of the strains of power and is willing, at last, to let them slip into my hands, which are just as willing to receive them. I am his only child and I was brought up all my life to rule. My father is therefore Mayor in law and name, but I am Mayor in fact. It is to me, now, that the armed forces of Wye have sworn allegiance and in Wye that is all that counts."
Seldon nodded. "Let it be as you say. But even so, whether it is Mayor Mannix IV or Mayor Rashelle I--it is the First, I suppose--there is no purpose in your holding me. I have told you that I dont have a workable psychohistory and I do not think that either I or anyone else will ever have one. I have told that to the Emperor. I am of no use either to you or to him."
Rashelle said, "How naive you are. Do you know the history of the Empire?"
Seldon shook his head. "I have recently come to wish that I knew it much better."
Dors said dryly, "I know Imperial history quite well, though the pre-Imperial age is my specialty, Madam Mayor. But what does it matter whether we do or do not?"
"If you know your history, you know that the House of Wye is ancient and honorable and is descended from the Dacian dynasty."
Dors said, "The Dacians ruled five thousand years ago. The number of their descendants in the hundred and fifty generations that have lived and died since then may number half the population of the Galaxy--if all genealogical claims, however outrageous, are accepted."
"Our genealogical claims, Dr. Venabili"--Rashelles tone of voice was, for the first time, cold and unfriendly and her eyes flashed like steel--"are not outrageous. They are fully documented. The House of Wye has maintained itself consistently in positions of power through all those generations and there have been occasions when we have held the Imperial throne and have ruled as Emperors."
"The history book-films," said Dors, "usually refer to the Wye rulers as anti-Emperors, never recognized by the bulk of the Empire."
"It depends on who writes the history book-films. In the future, we will, for the throne which has been ours will be ours again."
"To accomplish that, you must bring about civil war."
"There wont be much risk of that," said Rashelle. She was smiling again. "That is what I must explain to you because I want Dr. Seldons help in preventing such a catastrophe. My father, Mannix IV, has been a man of peace all his life. He has been loyal to whomever it might be that ruled in the Imperial Palace and he has kept Wye a prosperous and strong pillar of the Trantorian economy for the good of all the Empire."
"I dont know that the Emperor has ever trusted him any the more for all that," said Dors.
"Im sure that is so," said Rashelle calmly, "for the Emperors that have occupied the Palace in my fathers time have known themselves to be usurpers of a usurping line. Usurpers cannot afford to trust the true rulers. And yet my father has kept the peace. He has, of course, developed and trained a magnificent security force to maintain the peace, prosperity, and stability of the sector and the Imperial authorities have allowed this because they wanted Wye peaceful, prosperous, stable--and loyal."
"But is it loyal?" said Dors.
"To the true Emperor, of course," said Rashelle, "and we have now reached the stage where our strength is such that we can take over the government quickly--in a lightning stroke, in fact--and before one can say civil war there will be a true Emperor--or Empress, if you prefer--and Trantor will be as peaceful as before."
Dors shook her head. "May I enlighten you? As a historian?"
"I am always willing to listen." And she inclined her head ever so slightly toward Dors.
"Whatever size your security force may be, however well-trained and well-equipped, they cannot possibly equal in size and strength the Imperial forces backed by twenty-five million worlds."
"Ah, but you have put your finger on the usurpers weakness, Dr. Venabili. There are twenty-five million worlds, with the Imperial forces scattered over them. Those forces are thinned out over incalculable space, under uncounted officers, none of them particularly ready for any action outside their own Provinces, many ready for action in their own interest rather than in the Empires. Our forces, on the other hand, are all here, all on Trantor. We can act and conclude before the distant generals and admirals can get it through their heads that they are needed."
"But that response will come--and with irresistible force."
"Are you certain of that?" said Rashelle. "We will be in the Palace. Trantor will be ours and at peace. Why should the Imperial forces stir when, by minding their own business, each petty military leader can have his own world to rule, his own Province?"
"But is that what you want?" asked Seldon wonderingly. "Are you telling me that you look forward to ruling over an Empire that will break up into splinters?"
Rashelle said, "That is exactly right. I would rule over Trantor, over its outlying space settlements, over the few nearby planetary systems that are part of the Trantorian Province. I would much rather be Emperor of Trantor than Emperor of the Galaxy."
"You would be satisfied with Trantor only," said Dors in tones of the deepest disbelief.
"Why not?" said Rashelle, suddenly ablaze. She leaned forward eagerly, both hands pressed palms-down on the table. "That is what my father has been planning for forty years. He is only clinging to life now to witness its fulfillment. Why do we need millions of worlds, distant worlds that mean nothing to us, that weaken us, that draw our forces far away from us into meaningless cubic parsecs of space, that drown us in administrative chaos, that ruin us with their endless quarrels and problems when they are all distant nothings as far as we are concerned? Our own populous world--our own planetary city--is Galaxy enough for us. We have all we need to support ourselves. As for the rest of the Galaxy, let it splinter. Every petty militarist can have his own splinter. They neednt fight. There will be enough for all."
"But they will fight, just the same," said Dors. "Each will refuse to be satisfied with his Province. Each will feel that his neighbor is not satisfied with his Province. Each will feel insecure and will dream of Galactic rule as the only guarantee of safety. This is certain, Madam Empress of Nothing. There will be endless wars into which you and Trantor will be inevitably drawn--to the ruin of all."
Rashelle said with clear contempt, "So it might seem, if one could see no farther than you do, if one relied on the ordinary lessons of history."
"What is there to see farther?" retorted Dors. "What is one to rely on beyond the lessons of history?"
"What lies beyond?" said Rashelle. "Why, he."
And her arm shot outward, her index finger jabbing toward Seldon.
"Me?" said Seldon. "I have already told you that psychohistory--"
Rashelle said, "Do not repeat what you have already said, my good Dr. Seldon. We gain nothing by that.--Do you think, Dr. Venabili, that my father was never aware of the danger of endless civil war? Do you think he did not bend his powerful mind to thinking of some way to prevent that? He has been prepared at any time these last ten years to take over the Empire in a day. It needed only the assurance of security beyond victory."
"Which you cant have," said Dors.
"Which we had the moment we heard of Dr. Seldons paper at the Decennial Convention. I saw at once that that was what we needed. My father was too old to see the significance at once. When I explained it, however, he saw it too and it was then that he formally transferred his power to me. So it is to you, Hari, that I owe my position and to you I will owe my greater position in the future."
"I keep telling you that it cannot--" began Seldon with deep annoyance.
"It is not important what can or cannot be done. What is important is what people will or will not believe can be done. They will believe you, Hari, when you tell them the psychohistoric prediction is that Trantor can rule itself and that the Provinces can become Kingdoms that will live together in peace."
"I will make no such prediction," said Seldon, "in the absence of true psychohistory. I wont play the charlatan. If you want something like that, you say it."
"Now, Hari. They wont believe me. Its you they will believe. The great mathematician. Why not oblige them?"
"As it happens," said Seldon "the Emperor also thought to use me as a source of self-serving prophecies. I refused to do it for him, so do you think I will agree to do it for you?"
Rashelle was silent for a while and when she spoke again her voice had lost its intense excitement and became almost coaxing.
"Hari," she said, "think a little of the difference between Cleon and myself. What Cleon undoubtedly wanted from you was propaganda to preserve his throne. It would be useless to give him that, for the throne cant be preserved. Dont you know that the Galactic Empire is in a state of decay, that it cannot endure for much longer? Trantor itself is slowly sliding into ruin because of the ever-increasing weight of administering twenty-five million worlds. Whats ahead of us is breakup and civil war, no matter what you do for Cleon."
Seldon said, "I have heard something like this said. It may even be true, but what then?"
"Well then, help it break into fragments without any war. Help me take Trantor. Help me establish a firm government over a realm small enough to be ruled efficiently. Let me give freedom to the rest of the Galaxy, each portion to go its own way according to its own customs and cultures. The Galaxy will become a working whole again through the free agencies of trade, tourism, and communication and the fate of cracking into disaster under the present rule of force that barely holds it together will be averted. My ambition is moderate indeed; one world, not millions; peace, not war; freedom, not slavery. Think about it and help me."
Seldon said, "Why should the Galaxy believe me any more than they would believe you? They dont know me and which of our fleet commanders will be impressed by the mere word psychohistory?"
"You wont be believed now, but I dont ask for action now. The House of Wye, having waited thousands of years, can wait thousands of days more. Cooperate with me and I will make your name famous. I will make the promise of psychohistory glow through all the worlds and at the proper time, when I judge the movement to be the chosen moment, you will pronounce your prediction and we will strike. Then, in a twinkling of history, the Galaxy will exist under a New Order that will render it stable and happy for eons. Come now, Hari, can you refuse me?"
Overthrow
THALUS, EMMER-- ... A sergeant in the armed security forces of the Wye Sector of ancient Trantor ...
... Aside from these totally unremarkable vital statistics, nothing is known of the man except that on one occasion he held the fate of the Galaxy in his fist.
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第八十六章
　　对这话第一个有反应的是芮奇。他几乎忘了强行加诸其上的斯文外衣，发出一阵刺耳的笑声之后，他说：“嘿，大姐，你不可能是区长，区长都是哥儿们。”
芮喜尔和蔼地望着他，惟妙惟肖地模仿他的腔调说：“嘿，小子，有些区长是哥儿们，有些区长是娘儿们。把这点放在你的脑袋瓜里，让它好好煮一煮。”
芮奇双眼凸起，似乎吓了一大跳。最后，他总算吐出一句话：“嘿，你在说普通话，大姐。”
“是呀，你要多普通就多普通。”芮喜尔仍然面带笑容。
谢顿清了清喉咙，说道：“你口音很地道，芮喜尔。”
芮喜尔稍微抬起头：“许多年来．我一直没机会用，不过我永远不会忘记。我曾经有个朋友，一个好朋友，他是个达尔人——那是我非常年轻的时候。”她叹息一声，“当然，他并不那样讲话——他相当聪明能干——但他懂这种口音，而他也教了我。跟他那样说话实在令人兴奋，等于创造了一个世界，将我们周遭的一切全部都排除在外。那实在太美妙，但也是一件不可能的事，家父的立场十分明白。如今，来了这个小淘气，芮奇，使我想起那些遥远的时光。他有那种口音，那种眼神，那种叛逆的表情，差不多六年以后，他就会成为少女心目中又爱又怕的对象。你会不会，芮奇？”
芮奇说：“我不知——呃，女士。”
“我确定你会的，而且你会变得非常像我的……老朋友。到那个时候，为了我自己着想．我最好别再见到你。现在晚餐已经结束，你该回到自己的房间去了，芮奇，如果你有兴趣，可以看一会儿全息电视。我猜想你不会读书。”
芮奇涨红了脸：“总有一天我会改，谢顿老爷说我会的。”
“那么我确信你一定会。”
一名年轻女子向芮奇走来，同时朝芮喜尔的方向尊敬地屈膝行礼。谢顿刚才并未来见到召唤她的讯号。
芮奇说：“我不能留下陪谢顿老爷和凡纳比里姑奶奶吗？”
“等一下你会见到他们，”芮喜尔温柔地说．“可是老爷、姑奶奶和我现在得谈一谈——所以你必须离开。”
铎丝对芮奇冒出一声坚决有力的“去！”男孩做了一个鬼脸，随即滑下椅子，跟着那名仆人走了。
芮奇离开后，芮喜尔便转向谢顿与铎丝，说道：“当然，那孩子会很安全，而且会受到良好待遇，这点请别担心。我自己也会很安全，正如我的女侍刚才走来那样，在我召唤之下，十几名武装卫士也能随传随到——而且动作快得多。我要你们了解这点。”
谢顿以平稳的语气说：“我们绝对没有想要攻击你，芮喜尔…或是我现在得说‘区长女士’？”
“还是叫我芮喜尔。据我所知，你可算一名摔跤选手，哈里；而你，铎丝，双刀耍得非常熟练，不过我们已将两把刀从你房间取走。我不要你们徒劳地仰赖你们的本事，因为我要哈里活着，你毫发无损。而且态度友善。”
“有一点大家十分了解，区长女士，”铎丝说，她摆明了拒绝表现友善态度。“那就是过去四十年来，直到今天为止，卫荷的统治者都是曼尼克斯四世。他如今仍旧活着，而且神智完全清醒。所以说——你究竟是什么人？”
“我正是自称的那个人，铎丝。曼尼克斯四世是我的父亲，正如你所说，他仍旧活着，而且神智清醒。在皇帝以及整个帝国的眼中，他才是卫荷的区长，但他厌倦了为权力而心力交瘁，终于甘愿让它溜到我手中，而我同样甘愿接受它。我是他的独生女，从小被教养成一名统治者。因此，家父是法律上与名义上的区长，而我则是实际上的区长。如今，卫荷军队宣誓效忠的对象是我，而在卫荷，这才是唯一算数的事。”
谢顿点了点头：“姑且接受你所说的一切。但即使如此，不论区长是曼尼克斯四世或芮喜尔一世——我想是一世吧——你们留置我都没有任何意义。我已经告诉你，我并未掌握一个可行的心理史学，也不认为我自己或其他人将来能掌握它。我曾经对皇上这样说过，而我对你和对他同样没有用。”
芮喜尔说：“你多么天真啊。你可知道帝国的历史吗？”
谢顿摇了摇头：“最近我才希望自己能对它多有些了解。”
铎丝以冷淡的口气说：“区长女士，虽然我的专长是在前帝国时代，但我对帝国历史相当了解。不过．我们是否了解又有什么关系呢？”
“如果你知道这些历史，就该知道卫荷世族是个古老而光荣的家族，而且是达斯皇朝的后裔。”
铎丝说：“达斯皇朝的统治是五千年前的事。从那时算起，过去一百五十代以来，他们的后人生生死死，加起来或许占了银河人数的一半——假如所有宗谱，不论多荒诞不经，全部计算在内的话。”
“我们的宗谱绝非荒诞不经，凡纳比里博士，”芮喜尔的语调首次变得冰冷而不友善，她的一双眼睛像精钢般闪烁。“它有完整的档案可供查证。在过去这些世代中，卫荷世族一贯保持掌权的地位。而且过去曾有一段时期，我们的确掌握皇位，以皇帝的名义统治帝国。”
“在历史胶卷书中，”铎丝说，“通常都将卫荷的统治者称为‘反帝’，他们从来不为帝国的大多数所承认。”
“那要看由谁撰写历史胶卷书。未来，将由我们执笔，因为曾是我们的皇位将重归我们所有。”
“想要达到这个目的，你必须发动一场内战。”
“不会有太大的风险。”芮喜尔再度露出笑容，“这就是我必须向你们解释的，因为我需要谢顿博士的帮助，来避免这样的一场大祸。我的父亲，曼尼克斯四世，一生都是一位和平主义者。不论是什么人统治着皇宫，他都一律效忠。而且为了整个帝国的利益，他始终保持卫荷的繁荣和强盛，使卫荷一直是川陀经济的重要支柱。”
“我似乎没听过皇上曾因此更信任他。”铎丝说。
“的确没有，”芮喜尔平静地说，“因为在家父的时代，占领皇宫的皇帝都知道自己是代代相传的篡位者。篡位者自然不敢信任真正的统治者。然而，家父一直以和为贵。当然，他建立并训练了一支强大的安全武力，用以维系本区的和平、繁荣与稳定。帝国当局一向默许这事，因为他们想要卫荷保持和平、繁荣、稳定——以及忠诚。”
“可是它忠诚吗？”锋丝说。
“对真正的皇帝，当然如此。”芮喜尔说，“我们现在已达成熟阶段，我们的力量能让我们迅速接收政府——事实上，是以迅雷不及掩耳的一击。在任何人能声称这是‘内战’之前，就会出现一位真正的皇帝——或是女皇，如果你喜欢这样说——而川陀将和过去同样太平。”
详丝摇了摇头：“我能开导你一下吗？以历史学家的身份？”
“我一向乐意受教。”她朝铎丝的方向稍微凑过头去。
“不论你的安全武力规模有多大，不论训练、装备如何精良，帝国武力却有两千五百万个世界做后盾，你们不可能比得上它的规模和力量。”
“啊，但你刚好指出了篡位者的弱点，凡纳比里博士。帝国武力分散在两千五百万个世界上，在无际的太空中，无数的军官统率下，那些兵力已被稀释殆尽。没有世界特别备置好出兵本身星省之外的兵力，而且许多都不顾帝国的利益，只愿意为自己的利益采取行动。反之，我们的部队都在此地，全部在川陀。在远方的将领、将军风闻需要他们发兵救援之前，他们便能迅速采取行动，迅速完成任务。”
“可是反应将随之而至——带着无可抵御的武力。”
“你确定这点吗？”芮喜尔说，“那时我们将坐镇皇宫，川陀将会是我们的，而且处于太平状态。帝国军队如果只管自己的事，每个小小的军事领袖都能统治自己的世界、自己的星省，他们为什么要来搅和？”
“那就是你所要的结果吗？”谢顿以好奇的口气问道，“你是在告诉我，你期望统治一个将会四分五裂的帝国？”
“正是如此。我将统治川陀，统治它外围的太空殖民地，统治属于川陀星省的几个邻近行星系。我将更像川陀帝国的皇帝，而不是整个银河的皇帝。”
“你会满足于仅仅拥有川陀？”铎丝以绝不相信的口吻说。
“为何不会？”芮喜尔突然变得慷慨激昂，她急切地将身子向前倾，双手手掌压在餐桌上。“那正是家父谋划了四十年的事。他如今苟延残喘，只为亲眼目睹它的实现。我们为什么需要千万个世界？遥远的世界对我们没有意义，只会削弱我们的实力；只会把我们的武力从身边抽走，洒向毫无意义的太空；只会将我们淹没在行政管理的混沌中；只会以无休无止的争吵和问题把我们拖垮——对我们而言，它们根本等于不存在。我们自己这个人口众多的世界——我们自己的行星都会——就已足以作为我们的银河；我们拥有自给自足的一切。至于银河其他部分，就让它四分五裂吧。每个小小军头都能拥有自己的一小片，他们无需争斗，银河足够让他们分。”
“可是无论如何，他们还是会彼此争斗。”铎丝说，“每一个都不肯满足于自己的星省；每一个都恐惧近邻不满足于他们的星省；每一个都感到不安全，而梦想统治银河才是唯一的安全保证。这是确定会发生的，我的虚无女皇。从此将会有无穷无尽的战争，你和你的川陀必然会被卷进去——同归于尽。”
芮喜尔以明显的轻蔑口吻说：“看来似乎如此，如果我们无法看得比你更远，如果我们仅仅凭借普通的历史教训。”
“还有什么能看得更远？”铎丝回嘴道，“除了历史的教训之外，我们还能凭借什么？”
“除此之外还有什么？”芮喜尔说，“哈，还有他！”
她的手臂猛然伸出，她的食指盲直指向谢顿。
“我？”谢顿说，“我已经告诉你心理史学……”
芮喜尔说：“别再重复你说过的话，我的好谢顿博士，它对我们毫无用处——凡纳比里博士，难道你认为家父从未体会无穷内战的危险？你以为他并末倾注过全部心力，设法想出一个防范之道？过去十年来，他随时准备好在一天之内接收帝国。唯一还需要的，就是胜利之外的安全保障。”
“那是你们无法掌握的。”铎丝说。
“在听到谢顿博士于十年会议中发表论文的那一刻，我们便掌握了它，我马上看出那正是我们需要的。家父由于年事过高，无法立刻看出它的重要性。然而，经过我一番解释之后，他也看出来了。就是在那个时候，他才正式将他的权力转移给我。所以说，我的地位是拜你之赐，哈里；而在未来，我更高的地位还是要拜你之赐。”
“我一直在告诉你，它不能……”谢顿以极不耐烦的口气说了半句。
“什么能做或不能做并不重要，重要的是人民相不相信什么事是能做得到的。当你告诉他们，心理史学预测的是川陀能够自我统治，每个星省可以变成一个王国，而所有的王国将和平共处，哈里，他们会相信你的。”
“在没有真正掌握到心理史学之前，”谢顿说，“我不会做这种预测，我不要扮演欺世的郎中。如果你要公布这种事，你自己去说。”
“算了，哈里，他们不会相信我的。他们会相信的是你，一位大数学家。为什么不满足他们呢？”
“说来很巧，”谢顿说，“皇上也曾经想到，利用我来散播一些自我实现的预言。我拒绝为他做这种事，你以为我会同意为你这样做吗？”
芮喜尔沉默了一会儿，当她再度开口的时候，她的声音不再激动无比，变得几乎是好言相劝。
“哈里，”她说，“稍微想想克里昂和我自己的不同之处。克里昂想从你身上得到的，无疑只是保障皇位的一种宣传。满足他这一点毫无用处，因为他的皇位根本保不住。难道你不知道，银河帝国处于一种衰败的状态，已经无法再支持多久吗？管理两千五百万个世界的负担越来越沉重，使川陀本身正在逐渐步向灭亡。不论你为克里昂做些什么，等在我们前面的只是分裂和内战。”
谢顿说：“我曾听过一些类似的话，它甚至有可能是真的，但是又怎么样？”
“所以说，应该帮它在毫无战争的状况下分裂。帮助我取得川陀；帮助我建立一个稳固的政府，统治一个足够小、足以有效治理的领域。让我把自由还给银河各个角落，让每一部分依照自身的习俗与文化各行其是。银河将会借着贸易、观光和通讯的自由媒介，再度变成一个活生生的整体。如此即可避免银河在目前这个几乎无法维系的统治力量之下，完全崩溃瓦解的悲惨命运。我的野心实在有限：一个世界，而不是千万个；和平，而不是战争；自由，而不是奴役。仔细想想，答应帮助我吧。”
谢顿说：“银河黎民既然不相信你，又为什么会相信我？他们根本不认识我。而且，我们的那些舰队指挥官，有哪个听到‘心理史学’几个字便会动容？”
“现在不会有人相信你，但我不需要现在行动。卫荷世族已等待了数千年，还可以再多等数千日。只要跟我合作，我会让你的名字响彻银河，我会让每个世界都知道心理史学成功在望。在适当的时候，当我判断时机成熟的那一刻，你就发表你的预测，而我们则发动攻击。然后，在历史的一转瞬间，银河便会处于一个新秩序之下，为它带来永永远远的稳定和幸福。来吧，哈里，你能拒绝我吗？”

Chapter 87

Breakfast the next morning was served in an alcove near the rooms of the captured three and it was luxurious indeed. There certainly was a considerable variety to the food and more than enough of everything. Seldon sat at the breakfast table with a mound of spicy sausages before him, totally ignoring Dors Venabilis gloomy predictions concerning stomachs and colic.
Raych said, "The dame ... the Madam Mayor said when she came to see me last night--"
"She came to see you?" said Seldon.
"Yeah. She said she wanted to make sure I was comfortable. She said when she had a chance she would take me to a zoo."
"A zoo?" Seldon looked at Dors. "What kind of zoo can they have on Trantor? Cats and dogs?"
"There are some aboriginal animals," said Dors, "and I imagine they import some aboriginals from other worlds and there are also the shared animals that all the worlds have--other worlds having more than Trantor, of course. As a matter of fact, Wye has a famous zoo, probably the best on the planet after the Imperial Zoo itself."
Raych said, "Shes a nice old lady."
"Not that old," said Dors, "but shes certainly feeding us well."
"Theres that," admitted Seldon.
When breakfast was over, Raych left to go exploring. Once they had retired to Dorss room, Seldon said with marked discontent, "I dont know how long well be left to ourselves. Shes obviously plotted ways of preoccupying our time."
Dors said, "Actually, we have little to complain of at the moment. Were much more comfortable here than we were either in Mycogen or Dahl."
Seldon said, "Dors, youre not being won over by that woman, are you?"
"Me? By Rashelle? Of course not. How can you possibly think so?"
"Well, youre comfortable. Youre well-fed. It would be natural to relax and accept what fortune brings."
"Yes, very natural. And why not do that?"
"Look, you were telling me last night about whats going to happen if she wins out. I may not be much of a historian myself, but I am willing to take your word for it and, actually, it makes sense--even to a nonhistorian. The Empire will shatter and its shards will be fighting each other for ... for ... indefinitely. She must be stopped."
"I agree," said Dors. "She must be. What I fail to see is how we can manage to do that little thing right at this moment." She looked at Seldon narrowly. "Hari, you didnt sleep last night, did you?"
"Did you?" It was apparent he had not.
Dors stared at him, a troubled look clouding her face. "Have you lain awake thinking of Galactic destruction because of what I said?"
"That and some other things. Is it possible to reach Chetter Hummin?"
This last was said in a whisper.
Dors said, "I tried to reach him when we first had to flee arrest in Dahl. He didnt come. Im sure he received the message, but he didnt come. It may be that, for any of a number of reasons, he just couldnt come to us, but when he can he will."
"Do you suppose something has happened to him?"
"No," said Dors patiently. "I dont think so."
"How can you know?"
"The word would somehow get to me. Im sure of it. And the word hasnt gotten to me."
Seldon frowned and said, "Im not as confident as you are about all this. In fact, Im not confident at all. Even if Hummin came, what can he do in this case? He cant fight all of Wye. If they have, as Rashelle claims, the best-organized army on Trantor, what will he be able to do against it?"
"Theres no point in discussing that. Do you suppose you can convince Rashelle--bang it into her head somehow--that you dont have psychohistory?"
"Im sure shes aware that I dont have it and that Im not going to get it for many years--if at all. But shell say I have psychohistory and if she does that skillfully enough, people will believe her and eventually they will act on what she says my predictions and pronouncements are--even if I dont say a word."
"Surely, that will take time. She wont build you up overnight. Or in a week. To do it properly, it might take her a year."
Seldon was pacing the length of the room, turning sharply on his heel and striding back. "That might be so, but I dont know. There would be pressure on her to do things quickly. She doesnt strike me as the kind of woman who has cultivated the habit of patience. And her old father, Mannix IV, would be even more impatient. He must feel the nearness of death and if hes worked for this all his life, he would much prefer to see it done a week before his death rather than a week after. Besides--"
Here he paused and looked around the empty room. "Besides what?"
"Well, we must have our freedom. You see, Ive solved the psychohistory problem."
Dorss eyes widened. "You have it! Youve worked it out."
"Not worked it out in the full sense. That might take decades ... centuries, for all I know. But I now know its practical, not just theoretical. I know it can be done so I must have the time, the peace, the facilities to work at it. The Empire must be held together till I--or possibly my successors--will learn how best to keep it so or how to minimize the disaster if it does split up despite us. It was the thought of having a beginning to my task and of not being able to work at it, that kept me up last night."
第八十七章
第十八部 颠覆
爱玛•塔勒斯：……古川陀卫荷区武装安全部队的一名中士……
……除了这些毫无重要性的体格数据外，对此人的一切一无所知。只知道在某个关键时刻，银河的命运曾掌握在他手中。
——《银河百科全书》


第八十七章
翌日上午．遭到软禁的三个人在一间凹室中进早餐，该处离他们三人的房间都不远。那实在是一顿奢侈的餐点，食物种类繁多，每一样都供过于求。
谢顿面对着餐桌上堆积如山的加味腊肠，完全不理会铎丝•凡纳比里有关反胃与腹痛的忧心警告。
芮奇说：“那娘儿们……区长女士昨晚来看我的时候说……”
“她去看过你？”谢顿问。
“是啊，她说她要确定我住得舒服。她还说有机会的话，会带我去动物园。”
“动物园？”谢顿望向铎丝，“在川陀能有什么样的动物园？猫狗展览？”
“这里有一些本土动物，”铎丝说，“我猜想他们还进口一些其他世界的特有种物。此外，某些动物是各世界共有的——当然，其他世界上的要比川陀的多。事实上，卫荷有个著名的动物园，在这颗行星上的知名度也许仅次于帝国动物园。”
芮奇说：“她是个不错的老大姐。”
“没有那么老，”铎丝说，“但她的确让我们吃得很好。”
“这倒没错。”谢顿承认。
早餐结束之后，芮奇径自跑到别处探险。
一旦他们回到铎丝的房间，谢顿立刻带着明显的不满说：“我不知道我们将被不闻不问多少时日，她显然早有计划，准备消磨我们的时间。”
铎丝说：“其实。此刻我们没什么好抱怨的。比起在麦曲生或达尔，我们在这里要舒适得多。”
谢顿说：“铎丝，你不会被那个女人笼络了吧，有没有？”
“我？被芮喜尔？当然没有。你怎么可能这样想？”
“嗯，你觉得舒服，吃得也好。这自然会使人松懈下来，接受命运的安排。”
“是啊，非常自然。为何不那样做呢？”
“听好，昨晚你告诉过我，她成功的话将会发生什么后果。我自己也许不是历史学家，但我愿意相信你的话。而且，事实上，那很有道理——即使对非历史学家而言。帝国将四分五裂，残存的碎片将互相争斗……永无止境。我们一定要阻止她才行。”
“我同意，”铎丝说，“一定要阻止她。我想不出来的是，在这个节骨眼上，我们如何能做到这件事。”她仔细审视着谢顿，“哈里，你昨晚上夜没睡，是不是？”
“你呢？”显然他是没睡。
铎丝凝视着他，脸上笼罩着阴郁的神情。“因为我说的那些话，害你整夜都在思考银河帝国毁灭的问题？”
“此外还有其他一些事。有没有可能联络到契特•夫铭？”最后几个字是悄声说的。
铎丝说：“我们在达尔开始逃避追捕时，我就试图和他联络，结果他没有来。我确定他收到了那条信息，可是他却没来。也许由于种种原因，他就是无法来找我们，但他有办法时一定会来。”
“你想他会不会发生了什么事？”
“不，”铎丝耐心地说，“我不这么想。”
“你怎能知道？”
“我总会听到一些消息，这点我确定。至今我未曾听到任何消息。”
谢顿皱了皱眉头，义说：“有关这一切，我不像你那么有信心。事实上，我连一点信心都没有。即使夫铭来到此地，这回他又能做什么？他不能和整个卫荷对抗。若是真如芮喜尔所声称，他们拥有川陀上组织最严密的军队，他有什么办法能与之抗衡？”
“讨论这件事根本没意义。你以为你能说服芮喜尔——用什么方法把话灌进她的脑袋——让她相信你并末拥有心理史学？”
“我确定她明白我没有，就算真有心理史学，她也知道我不可能在末来几年内掌握得到。但她会宣称我拥有心理史学，假使她做得足够高明，人们就会相信她，最后不论她说我的预测和断言是什么，他们都会根据她的话行动——即使我一个字也没说。”
“当然，那需要一些时间。她不能让你在一夜之间成名，或是一周之内。想要好好做成这件事，可能要花上她一年的时间。”
谢顿正在房中来回踱步，走到墙角便猛然向后转，再大踏步走回来。“或许就是这样，可是我不知道。应该有些压力促使她尽快行动，在我看来，她不是被培养出了耐心的那种女人。而她的老父亲，曼尼克斯四世，甚至会更没耐心。他一定感到死期将近，如果他一生都在经营这件事，他将非常希望成功之日是在他死前一周，而并非死后一周。此外——”说到这里他顿了一顿，开始环顾这个空洞的房间。
“此外什么？”
“嗯，我们必须拥有自由。你可知道，我已经解决了心理史学的问题。”
铎丝睁大眼睛：“你解决了！你完成了。”
“不，还不算成功。据我判断，那可能要花上数十年……数世纪。但我现在知道它是可行的，而不只是理论的产物。我知道它能成功，所以我必须有充足的时间、太平的局势，以及必要的环境来完成它。帝国必须维持一个整体，直到我——也可能是我的后继者——找出维持现状的最好方法；或者，假使它无论如何也要分裂，如何才能将灾难减至最小程度。就是因为想到我的工作有了起点，却又无法着手进行，才使我昨晚整夜未曾合眼。”
Chapter 88

It was their fifth day in Wye and in the morning Dors was helping Raych into a formal costume that neither was quite familiar with. Raych looked at himself dubiously in the holomirror and saw a reflected image that faced him with precision, imitating all his motions but without any inversion of left and right. Raych had never used a holomirror before and had been unable to keep from trying to feel it, then laughing, almost with embarrassment, when his hand passed through it while the images hand poked ineffectually at his real body.
He said at last, "I look funny."
He studied his tunic, which was made of a very pliant material, with a thin filigreed belt, then passed his hands up a stiff collar that rose like a cup past his ears on either side.
"My head looks like a ball inside a bowl."
Dors said, "But this is the sort of thing rich children wear in Wye. Everyone who sees you will admire you and envy you."
"With my hair all stuck down?"
"Certainly. Youll wear this round little hat."
"Itll make my head more like a ball."
"Then dont let anyone kick it. Now, remember what I told you. Keep your wits about you and dont act like a kid."
"But I am a kid," he said, looking up at her with a wide-eyed innocent expression.
"Im surprised to hear you say that," said Dors. "Im sure you think of yourself as a twelve-year-old adult."
Raych grinned. "Okay. Ill be a good spy."
"Thats not what Im telling you to be. Dont take chances. Dont sneak behind doors to listen. If you get caught at it, youre no good to anyone--especially not to yourself."
"Aw, cmon, Missus, what do ya think I am? A kid or somethin?"
"You just said you were, didnt you, Raych? You just listen to everything thats said without seeming to. And remember what you hear. And tell us. Thats simple enough."
"Simple enough for you to say, Missus Venabili," said Raych with a grin, "and simple enough for me to do."
"And be careful."
Raych winked. "You bet."
A flunky (as coolly impolite as only an arrogant flunky can be) came to take Raych to where Rashelle was awaiting him.
Seldon looked after them and said thoughtfully, "He probably wont see the zoo, hell be listening so carefully. Im not sure its right to thrust a boy into danger like that."
"Danger? I doubt it. Raych was brought up in the slums of Billibotton, remember. I suspect he has more alley smarts than you and I put together. Besides, Rashelle is fond of him and will interpret everything he does in his favor. Poor woman."
"Are you actually sorry for her, Dors?"
"Do you mean that shes not worth sympathy because shes a Mayors daughter and considers herself a Mayor in her own right--and because shes intent on destroying the Empire? Perhaps youre right, but even so there are some aspects of her for which one might show some sympathy. For instance, shes had an unhappy love affair. Thats pretty evident. Undoubtedly, her heart was broken--for a time, at least."
Seldon said, "Have you ever had an unhappy love affair, Dors?"
Dors considered for a moment or two, then said, "Not really. Im too involved with my work to get a broken heart."
"I thought as much."
"Then why did you ask?"
"I might have been wrong."
"How about you?"
Seldon seemed uneasy. "As a matter of fact, yes. I have spared the time for a broken heart. Badly cracked, anyway."
"I thought as much."
"Then why did you ask?"
"Not because I thought I might be wrong, I promise you. I just wanted to see if you would lie. You didnt and Im glad."
There was a pause and then Seldon said, "Five days have passed and nothing has happened."
"Except that we are being treated well, Hari."
"If animals could think, theyd think they were being treated well when they were only being fattened for the slaughter."
"I admit shes fattening the Empire for the slaughter."
"But when?"
"I presume when shes ready."
"She boasted she could complete the coup in a day and the impression I got was that she could do that on any day."
"Even if she could, she would want to make sure that she could cripple the Imperial reaction and that might take time."
"How much time? She plans to cripple the reaction by using me, but she is making no effort to do so. There is no sign that shes trying to build up my importance. Wherever I go in Wye Im unrecognized. There are no Wyan crowds gathering to cheer me. Theres nothing on the news holocasts."
Dors smiled. "One would almost suppose that your feelings are hurt at not being made famous. Youre naive, Hari. Or not a historian, which is the same thing. I think you had better be more pleased that the study of psychohistory will be bound to make a historian of you than that it may save the Empire. If all human beings understood history, they might cease making the same stupid mistakes over and over."
"In what way am I naive?" asked Seldon lifting his head and staring down his nose at her.
"Dont be offended, Hari. I think its one of your attractive features, actually."
"I know. It arouses your maternal instincts and you have been asked to take care of me. But in what way am I naive?"
"In thinking that Rashelle would try to propagandize the population of the Empire, generally, into accepting you as seer. She would accomplish nothing in that way. Quadrillions of people are hard to move quickly. There is social and psychological inertia, as well as physical inertia. And, by coming out into the open, she would simply alert Demerzel."
"Then what is she doing?"
"My guess is that the information about you--suitably exaggerated and glorified--is going out to a crucial few. It is going to those Viceroys of sectors, those admirals of fleets, those people of influence she feels look kindly upon her--or grimly upon the Emperor. A hundred or so of those who might rally to her side will manage to confuse the Loyalists just long enough to allow Rashelle the First to set up her New Order firmly enough to beat off whatever resistance might develop. At least, I imagine that is how she reasons."
"And yet we havent heard from Hummin."
"Im sure he must be doing something just the same. This is too important to ignore."
"Has it occurred to you that he might be dead?"
"Thats a possibility, but I dont think so. If he was, the news would reach me."
"Here?"
"Even here."
Seldon raised his eyebrows, but said nothing.
Raych came back in the late afternoon, happy and excited, with descriptions of monkeys and of Bakarian demoires and he dominated the conversation during dinner.
It was not until after dinner when they were in their own quarters that Dors said, "Now, tell me what happened with Madam Mayor, Raych. Tell me anything she did or said that you think we ought to know."
"One thing," said Raych, his face lighting up. "Thats why she didnt show at dinner, I bet."
"What was it?"
"The zoo was closed except for us, you know. There were lots of us--Rashelle and me and all sorts of guys in uniforms and dames in fancy clothes and like that. Then this guy in a uniform--a different guy, who wasnt there to begin with--came in toward the end and he said something in a low voice and Rashelle turned to all the people and made with her hand like they shouldnt move and they didnt. And she went a little ways away with this new guy, so she could talk to him and no one could hear her. Except I kept paying no attention and kept looking at the different cages and sort of moved near to Rashelle so I could hear her. "She said, How dare they? like she was real mad. And the guy in the uniform, he looked nervous--I just got quick looks because I was trying to make out like I was watching the animals--so mostly I just heard the words. He said somebody--I dont remember the name, but he was a general or somethin. He said this general said the officers had sworn religious to Rashelles old man--"
"Sworn allegiance," said Dors.
"Somethin like that and they was nervous about havin to do what a dame says. He said they wanted the old man or else, if he was kind of sick, he should pick some guy to be Mayor, not a dame."
"Not a dame? Are you sure?"
"Thats what he said. He like whispered it. He was so nervous and Rashelle was so mad she could hardly speak. She said, Ill have his head. They will all swear allegiance to me tomorrow and whoever refuses will lave cause to regret it before an hour has passed. Thats exactly what she said. She broke up the whole party and we all came back and she didnt say one word to me all the time. Just sat there, looking kinda mean and angry."
Dors said, "Good. Dont you mention this to anyone, Raych."
"Course not. Is it what you wanted?"
"Very much what I wanted. You did well, Raych. Now, go to your room and forget the whole thing. Dont even think about it."
Once he was gone, Dors turned to Seldon and said, "This is very interesting. Daughters have succeeded fathers--or mothers, for that matter--and held Mayoralties or other high offices on any number of occasions. There have even been reigning Empresses, as you undoubtedly know, and I cant recall that there was ever in Imperial history any serious question of serving under one. It makes one wonder why such a thing should now, arise in Wye."
Seldon said, "Why not? Weve only recently been in Mycogen, where women are held in a total lack of esteem and couldnt possibly hold positions of power, however minor."
"Yes, of course, but thats an exception. There are other places where women dominate. For the most part, though, government and power have been more or less equisexual. If more men tend to hold high positions, it is usually because women tend to be more bound--biologically--to children."
"But what is the situation in Wye?"
"Equisexual, as far as I know. Rashelle didnt hesitate to assume Mayoral power and I imagine old Mannix didnt hesitate to grant it to her. And she was surprised and furious at encountering male dissent. She cant have expected it."
Seldon said, "Youre clearly pleased at this. Why?"
"Simply because its so unnatural that it must be contrived and I imagine Hummin is doing the contriving."
Seldon said thoughtfully, "You think so?"
"I do," said Dors.
"You know," said Seldon, "so do I."

第八十八章
　　这是他们来到卫荷的第五天早上，铎丝正在帮芮奇穿上一件正式的服装，两人对这种装束都不怎么熟悉。
芮奇以怀疑的眼神望着全息镜中的自己，看到一个准确面对他的反射影像，模仿着他所有的动作，却没有任何左右反转。芮奇以前从未用过全息镜，忍不住试着伸手摸了摸。当他的手穿过那面镜子，而影像的手剌入他真实的身躯时，他马上哈哈大笑，真是有点尴尬。
最后他终于说：“我看来很可笑。”
他打量着身上的短袖袍，那是用非常柔软的质料裁制的，附有一条金丝缠绕的细皮带。然后，他伸手摸摸硬邦邦的衣领，它像个杯子那样竖住他的耳朵两旁。
“我的头看来像是放在碗里的球。”
铎丝说：“但卫荷的富家子弟穿的就是这种东西，每个看到你的人都会赞美你、羡慕你。”
“我的头发得全部趴下吗？”
“这还用说，你要戴着小圆帽。”
“它会让我的头更像个球。”
“那就注意别让任何人踢它。好，记住我告诉你的话，你要随时保持警觉，别表现得像个孩子。”
“但我就是个孩子。”他抬头望着她，睁大眼睛露出一副无辜的表情。
“听到你这样讲真令我惊讶，”铎丝说道，“我确定你自认是个十二岁的成年人。”
芮奇咧嘴笑了笑：“好吧，我会做个好间谍。”
“那不是我叫你做的事。别冒任何险，别躲在门后偷听。假如你被当场抓到，对任何人都没好处——尤其是对你自己。”
“喔，得了吧，姑奶奶，你以为我是什么？一个孩子还是什么东西？”
“你刚刚才说你是个孩子，不是吗？你只要注意听别人说的每件事，但不要显出偷听的样子。记住你所听到的一切，回来之后告诉我们，就是这么简单。”
“你说得倒很简单，凡纳比里姑奶奶，”芮奇又咧嘴一笑，“而我做起来也很简单。”
“还有，要小心点。’’
芮奇眨了眨眼：“遵命。”
一名仆役（只有傲慢自大的仆役才会那么不客气）来接芮奇，带他去找正在等他的芮喜尔。
谢顿望着他们的背影，若有所思地说：“他也许不会看到什么动物，他会非常仔细地偷听。把一个孩子推进那样的危险中，我不确定这样做对不对。”
“危险？我怀疑这一点。芮奇是在脐眼的贫民窟养大的，记得吧。我觉得他的生存能力比你我加起来还要强。此外，芮喜尔喜欢他，会把他做的每件事都往好处解释——可怜的女人。”
“你真的觉得她可怜吗？”
“你的意思是她不值得同情，因为她是区长的女儿，而且自视为理所当然的区长——还有因为她打算毁掉帝国？你也许是对的，但即使如此，她也有某此方面值得我们同情。比如说，她曾有一段以悲剧收场的恋情，那十分明显。毫无疑问，她的心碎了——至少有一段时间。”
谢顿说：“你曾有过一段以悲剧收场的恋情吗，铎丝？”
铎丝考虑了一会儿，然后说：“不能算有，我太专注于自己的工作，没有时间心碎。”
“我早就想到了。”
“那你为什么要问？”
“我有可能猜错。”
“你自己呢？”
谢顿显得很不自在：“事实上，的确有，我曾有段时间有颗破碎的心——至少，它可算是伤痕累累。”
“我早就想到了。”
“那你为什么要问？”
“并非因为我认为自己可能猜错。我只是想看看你会不会说谎。你没有那样做，这使我很高兴。”
顿了一下之后，谢顿又说：“五天过去了，什么事都没发生。”
“只是我们一直受到良好待遇，哈里。”
“如果动物能思想，它们也会认为受到了良好待遇，其实养肥它们只是为屠宰罢了。”
“我承认她正在养肥帝国准备屠宰。”
“可是什么时候呢？”
“我猜是当她准备妥当后。”
“她夸口说能在一天内完成军事政变，而我所得到的印象是，她有办法在任何一天进行。”
“即使她有办法，她还要确定能消除帝国的反击，那可能需要些时间。”
“多少时间？她计划利用我来消除那些反击，可是她并未进行这方面的努力。没有迹象显示她试图宣传我的重要性，我在卫荷不论走到哪里，都没有任何人认识我。没有卫荷的群众聚过来向我欢呼，全息新闻中也什么都没有。”
铎丝微微一笑：“别人几乎会猜想你是因为没能出名而感到难过。你太天真了，哈里，或者说你不是个历史学家，这是同一码子事。研究心理史学必定会使你成为一个历史学家，比较之下拯救帝国的机会倒没有那么大，对于这个事实，我认为你最好更满意点。如果所有人类都了解历史，他们或许就不会一而再、再而三地犯同样的错误。”
“我哪里天真了？”谢顿扬起头来，睨视着看她。
“别生气，哈里。其实，我认为那是你迷人的特点之一。”
“我知道。它激起了你的母性本能，何况你曾经受托照顾我。可是我哪里天真了？”
“你天真地以为芮喜尔会试图对帝国的民众做全面性宣传，让大家接受你是个先知。那样做她将一无所获，万兆民众难以很快打动。除了有形的惯性之外，还有社会和心理上的惯性。而且，假如那样公然行事，她等于是在警告丹莫茨尔。”
“那她正在做什么呢？”
“我的猜想是，有关你的消息——经过适当的夸大和美化——正在传给关键的少数人，传给她觉得对她友善，或是厌恶帝国的星区总督、舰队司令，以及具有影响力的人士。一百多个这样的人若是站在她那边，就能使忠贞之士困惑好一阵子，足以允许芮喜尔一世稳稳建立起她的新秩序，击败任何可能潜在的反抗力量。至少，我猜那是她心中的想法。”
“但我们还没有夫铭的消息。”
“我确信他一定还是在做些什么，他不会忽略这么重要的事。”
“你有没有想到过他可能死了？”
“那是一种可能，但我不那么想，否则我会得到消息。”
“在这里？”
“即使在这里。”
谢顿扬起眉毛，但没有再说话。
芮奇在接近傍晚时回来，他既高兴又兴奋，不停地描述着猴子与巴卡鹤的种种趣事。而在晚餐时，从头到尾他都兴冲冲地抢着说话。
直到晚餐结束，他们回到自己的寝室，铎丝才说：“现存，告诉我区长女士所做的或所说的任何事情，把你认为我们该知道的都告诉我。”
“有一件事，”芮奇的面孔亮了起来，“她没出席晚餐，那一定是有原因的，我敢打赌。”
“是什么事？”
“你知道的，动物园今天关闭，只对我们开放。我们有许多人——芮喜尔和我还有穿制服的各种哥儿们和穿着拉风衣裳的娘儿们等等。然后一个穿制服的哥儿们——另一个哥儿们，他原来不在那里——在快结束的时候走进来。他低声说了些什么，芮喜尔就转向大家，做了一个好像他们不该动的手势，他们全都乖乖不动。然后她和这个新来的哥儿们走开些，这样她就能和他说话，而别人听不到她说些什么。不过我继续装得心不在焉，继续看着各个笼子，就这样凑近了芮喜尔，所以我能听到她讲的话。
“她说：‘他们怎么敢？’她像是真火了。那个穿制服的哥儿们，他看来很紧张——我只是很快瞥了一眼，因为我试着装作在观看动物，所以人多数时间我只是听到那些对话。他说某个人，我不记得名字，但他是个将军什么的。他说这个将军说，军官们曾经对芮喜尔的老头宣誓效忠…一”
“宣誓效忠。”铎丝说。
“反正是像那样的东西，而他们对于服从一个娘儿们的话感到不对劲。他说他们要那个老头，或者，如果他生了病什么的，他应该挑个哥儿们做区长，而不是一个娘儿们。”
“不是一个娘儿们？你确定吗？”
“他就是那么说的，他说的差不多是悄悄话。他是那么紧张，芮喜尔又是那么恼火，她几乎说不出话来。她说：‘我要他的脑袋，明天他们通通要对我宣誓效忠，不论谁拒绝，一小时之内，他就会有后悔的理由。’那是她说的每一个字。她解散了整个活动，我们就全部回来了。她一直没对我说半句话，只是坐在那里，看来又凶又生气。”
铎丝说：“很好，别对任何人提起这些．芮奇。”
“当然不会。这就是你要的吗？”
“正是我要的，你做得很好，芮奇。现在，回到你的房间，把整件事忘掉，甚至不要想到它。”
等他离开之后，铎丝立刻转向谢顿说：“这非常有意思。过去有许许多多的例子，是女儿继父亲或母亲之后，接掌区长职位或其他高位。过去甚至有在位的女皇，这点你儿疑也知道。而我想不起来在帝国历史上，有哪个女皇的领导曾经引起严重问题。这不禁令人纳闷，为何这种事如今会在卫荷发生。”
谢顿说：“为何不呢？我们最近才在麦曲生待过，那里的女人完全不受尊重，而且不可能拥有任何权力的位置，不论多么低微。”
“没错，当然，但那是个例外。也有其他一此地方，是由女性主宰一切。不过，大多数的情况，两性在政府和权力上的地位多少是平等的。假如说掌握高位的男性较多，通常是因为女性受子女的牵累较多——就生物学观点而言。”
“但卫荷的情况如何？”
“两性平等，据我所知是这样。芮喜尔并未犹豫获取区长的权力，我猜想老曼尼克斯也未曾犹豫交给她。在男性异议分子出现之际，她感到惊讶和狂怒，是因为根本出乎她意料之外。”
谢顿说：“你显然对这点感到高兴。为什么？”
“因为它既然如此不寻常，就一定是人为策动的结果，而我猜想策动者便是夫铭。”
谢顿意味深长地说：“你这么想吗？”
“我是这么想。”铎丝说。
“你可知道，”谢顿说，“我也这么想。”
Chapter 89

It was their tenth day in Wye and in the morning Hari Seldons door signal sounded and Raychs high-pitched voice outside was crying out, "Mister! Mister Seldon! Its war!"
Seldon took a moment to swap from sleep to wakefulness and scrambled out of bed. He was shivering slightly (the Wyans liked their domiciles on the chilly side, he had discovered quite early in his stay there) when he threw the door open.
Raych bounced in, excited and wide-eyed. "Mister Seldon, they have Mannix, the old Mayor. They have--"
"Who have, Raych?"
"The Imperials, Their jets came in last night all over. The news holocasts are telling all about it. Its on in Missuss room. She said to let ya sleep, but I figured ya would wanner know."
"And you were quite right." Seldon pausing only tong enough to throw on a bathrobe, burst into Dorss room. She was fully dressed and was watching the holo-set in the alcove.
Behind the clear, small image of a desk sat a man, with the Spaceship-and-Sun sharply defined on the left-front of his tunic. On either side, two soldiers, also wearing the Spaceship-and-Sun, stood armed. The officer at the desk was saying, "--is under the peaceful control of his Imperial Majesty. Mayor Mannix is safe and well and is in full possession of his Mayoral powers under the guidance of friendly Imperial troops. He will be before you soon to urge calm on all Wyans and to ask any Wyan soldiers still in arms to lay them down."
There were other news holocasts by various newsmen with unemotional voices, all wearing Imperial armbands. The news was all the same: surrender by this or that unit of the Wyan security forces after firing a few shots for the record--and sometimes after no resistance at all. This town center and that town center were occupied--and there were repeated views of Wyan crowds somberly watching Imperial forces marching down the streets.
Dors said, "It was perfectly executed, Hari. Surprise was complete. There was no chance of resistance and none of consequence was offered."
Then Mayor Mannix IV appeared, as had been promised. He was standing upright and, perhaps for the sake of appearances, there were no Imperials in sight, though Seldon was reasonably certain that an adequate number were present just out of camera range.
Mannix was old, but his strength, though worn, was still apparent. His eyes did not meet the holo-camera and his words were spoken as though forced upon him--but, as had been promised, they counseled Wyans to remain calm, to offer no resistance, to keep Wye from harm, and to cooperate with the Emperor who, it was hoped, would survive long on the throne.
"No mention of Rashelle," said Seldon. "Its as though his daughter doesnt exist."
"No one has mentioned her," said Dors, "and this place, which is, after all, her residence--or one of them--hasnt been attacked. Even if she manages to slip away and take refuge in some neighboring sector, I doubt she will be safe anywhere on Trantor for long."
"Perhaps not," came a voice; "but Ill be safe here for a little while." Rashelle entered. She was properly dressed, properly calm. She was even smiling, but it was no smile of joy; it was, rather, a cold baring of teeth.
The three stared at her in surprise for a moment and Seldon wondered if she had any of her servants with her or if they had promptly deserted her at the first sign of adversity.
Dors said a little coldly, "I see, Madam Mayor, that your hopes for a coup can not be maintained. Apparently, you have been forestalled."
"I have not been forestalled. I have been betrayed. My officers have been tampered with and--against all history and rationality--they have refused to fight for a woman but only for their old master. And, traitors that they are, they then let their old master be seized so that he cannot lead them in resistance."
She looked about for a chair and sat down. "And now the Empire must continue to decay and die when I was prepared to offer it new life."
"I think," said Dors, "the Empire has avoided an indefinite period of useless fighting and destruction. Console yourself with that, Madam Mayor."
It was as though Rashelle did not hear her. "So many years of preparation destroyed in a night."
She sat there beaten, defeated, and seemed to have aged twenty years.
Dors said, "It could scarcely have been done in a night. The suborning of your officers--if that took place--must have taken time."
"At that, Demerzel is a master and quite obviously I underestimated him. How he did it, I dont know--threats, bribes, smooth and specious argument. He is a master at the art of stealth and betrayal--I should have known." She went on after a pause. "If this was outright force on his part, I would have had no trouble destroying anything he sent against us. Who would think that Wye would be betrayed, that an oath of allegiance would be so lightly thrown aside?"
Seldon said with automatic rationality, "But I imagine the oath was made not to you, but to your father."
"Nonsense," said Rashelle vigorously. "When my father gave me the Mayoral office, as he was legally entitled to do, he automatically passed on to me any oaths of allegiance made to him. There is ample precedence for this. It is customary to have the oath repeated to the new ruler, but that is a ceremony only and not a legal requirement. My officers know that, though they choose to forget. They use my womanhood as an excuse because they quake in fear of Imperial vengeance that would never have come had they been staunch or tremble with greed for promised rewards they will surely never get--if I know Demerzel." She turned sharply toward Seldon. "He wants you, you know. Demerzel struck at us for you."
Seldon started. "Why me?"
"Dont be a fool. For the same reason I wanted you ... to use you as a tool, of course." She sighed. "At least I am not utterly betrayed. There are still loyal soldiers to be found.--Sergeant!"
Sergeant Emmer Thalus entered with a soft cautious step that seemed incongruous, considering his size. His uniform was spruce, his long blond mustache fiercely curled.
"Madam Mayor," he said, drawing himself to attention with a snap. He was still, in appearance, the side of beef that Hari had named him--a man still following orders blindly, totally oblivious to the new and changed state of affairs.
Rashelle smiled sadly at Raych. "And how are you, little Raych? I had meant to make something of you. It seems now I wont be able to."
"Hello, Missus ... Madam," said Raych awkwardly.
"And to have made something of you too, Dr. Seldon," said Rashelle, "and there also I must crave pardon. I cannot."
"For me, Madam, you need have no regrets."
"But I do. I cannot very well let Demerzel have you. That would be one victory too many for him and at least I can stop that."
"I would not work for him, Madam, I assure you, any more than I would have worked for you."
"It is not a matter of work. It is a matter of being used. Farewell, Dr. Seldon. Sergeant, blast him."
The sergeant drew his blaster at once and Dors, with a loud cry, lunged forward--but Seldon reached out for her and caught her by the elbow. He hung on desperately.
"Stay back, Dors," he shouted, "or hell kill you. He wont kill me. You too, Raych. Stand back. Dont move."
Seldon faced the sergeant. "You hesitate, Sergeant, because you know you cannot shoot. I might have killed you ten days ago, but I did not. And you gave me your word of honor at that time that you would protect me."
"What are you waiting for?" snapped Rashelle. "I said shoot him down, Sergeant."
Seldon said nothing more. He stood there while the sergeant, eyes bulging, held his blaster steady and pointed at Seldons head.
"You have your order!" shrieked Rashelle.
"I have your word," said Seldon quietly.
And Sergeant Thalus said in a choked tone, "Dishonored either way." His hand fell and his blaster clanged to the floor.
Rashelle cried out, "Then you too betray me."
Before Seldon could move or Dors free herself from his grip, Rashelle seized the blaster, turned it on the sergeant, and closed contact. Seldon had never seen anyone blasted before. Somehow, from the name of the weapon perhaps, he had expected a loud noise, an explosion of flesh and blood. This Wyan blaster, at least, did nothing of the sort. What mangling it did to the organs inside the sergeants chest Seldon could not tell but, without a change in expression, without a wince of pain, the sergeant crumbled and fell, dead beyond any doubt or any hope.
And Rashelle turned the blaster on Seldon with a firmness that put to rest any hope for his own life beyond the next second.
It was Raych, however, who jumped into action the moment the sergeant fell. Racing between Seldon and Rashelle, he waved his hands wildly.
"Missus, Missus," he called. "Dont shoot."
For a moment, Rashelle looked confused. "Out of the way, Raych. I dont want to hurt you."
That moment of hesitation was all Dors needed. Breaking loose violently, she plunged toward Rashelle with a long low dive. Rashelle went down with a cry and the blaster hit the ground a second time.
Raych retrieved it.
Seldon, with a deep and shuddering breath, said, "Raych, give that to me." But Raych backed away.
"Ya aint gonna kill her, are ya, Mister Seldon? She was nice to me."
"I wont kill anyone, Raych," said Seldon. "She killed the sergeant and would have killed me, but she didnt shoot rather than hurt you and well let her live for that."
It was Seldon, who now sat down, the blaster held loosely in his hand, while Dors removed the neuronic whip from the dead sergeants other holster.
A new voice rang out. "Ill take care of her now, Seldon."
Seldon looked up and in sudden joy said, "Hummin! Finally!"
"Im sorry it took so long, Seldon. I had a lot to do. How are you, Dr. Venabili? I take it this is Mannixs daughter, Rashelle. But who is the boy?"
"Raych is a young Dahlite friend of ours," said Seldon.
Soldiers were entering and, at a small gesture from Hummin, they lifted Rashelle respectfully.
Dors, able to suspend her intent surveillance of the other woman, brushed at her clothes with her hands and smoothed her blouse. Seldon suddenly realized that he was still in his bathrobe.
Rashelle, shaking herself loose from the soldiers with contempt, pointed to Hummin and said to Seldon, "Who is this?"
Seldon said, "It is Chetter Hummin, a friend of mine and my protector on this planet."
"Your protector." Rashelle laughed madly. "You fool! You idiot! That man is Demerzel and if you look at your Venabili woman, you will see from her face that she is perfectly aware of that. You have been trapped all along, far worse than ever you were with me!"

第八十九章
　　这是他们来到卫荷的第十天早上，哈里•谢顿的房门信号突然响起，外面随即传来芮奇高亢的声音：“先生！谢顿先生！战争爆发了！”
谢顿从睡梦中惊醒，然后匆匆起床。当他推开房门的时候，身子不禁微微发抖（卫荷人喜欢让他们的住所保持低温，住在此地不久之后他便发现这点）。
芮奇跳进来，兴奋得睁大眼睛：“谢顿先生，他们抓到了曼尼克斯，那个老区长！他们还……”
“他们是谁，芮奇？”
“帝国军队，他们的喷射机昨晚飞进来，到处都是。全息新闻现在播报的都是这些，在姑奶奶的房间。她说要让你睡觉，但我猜你会想知道。”
“你猜得相当正确。”谢顿只耽搁了披上一件浴袍的时间，就立刻闯进铎丝房中。她早已穿戴整齐，正在凹室内观看全息电视。
在画面中，一张整洁的小办公桌后面坐着一名男子，他的短袖军服左胸处有个耀眼的“星舰与太阳”标志。在他两旁站着两名武装士兵，两人身上也都挂着“星舰与太阳”。坐在办公桌旁的军官正在说：“……在皇帝陛下的和平控制下，在友善的帝国部队保护下，曼尼克斯区长安然无事，完全掌握着区长的权力。他很快就会出现在你们面前，来劝导所有的卫荷人保持冷静，并要求所有顽抗的卫荷战士放下武器。”
此外还有一些记者播报的全息新闻，他们全都佩戴着帝国臂章，声音毫无感情，新闻内容都千篇一律：在象征性开火后——有时甚至根本未做抵抗——卫荷安全武力的这个、那个部队便全部投降；这个、那个市镇中心已被占领——卫荷群众面色凝重地看着帝国军队列队通过大街小巷，这样的画面不断重复着。
铎丝说：“这是一次完美的行动，哈里，完全出其不意。根本没有抵抗的机会，根本没有重大的抵抗行动。”
然后，正如刚才的预报，区长曼尼克斯四世出现了。他笔直地站着，或许为了面子上好看，画面中看不见帝国军士。不过谢顿相当确定，他们一定站在摄影机镜头外。
曼尼克斯相当年迈，虽然神情疲惫，但体力显然还不错。他的目光并未对准全息摄影机，他说的话似乎都是被强迫的——不过，正如刚才的预报，内容是劝告卫荷人保持冷静，不要做任何抵抗，要避免使卫荷受到伤害，要与皇上充分合作，并且祝福皇上万寿无疆。
“没有提到芮喜尔，”谢顿说，“仿佛他的女儿不存在。”
“没有任何人提到她。”铎丝说，“这个地方毕竟是她的官邸，或者是其中之一，却未曾遭到攻击。即使她设法溜走，前往邻区寻求庇护，我也不信她能在川陀任何角落获得长久的安全。”
“也许不能，”突然传来另一个声音，“但我在这里至少暂时安全。”
芮喜尔走进来。她的穿着如常，镇静如常。她甚至带着微笑，但却显得皮笑肉不笑，更像是一种龇牙咧嘴的冷酷表情。
其他三人惊讶地望了她片刻。谢顿纳闷是否还有任何随从跟着她，或是在事变的迹象出现后，他们立刻弃她而去。
铎丝冷淡地说道：“我看，区长女士，你想发动军事政变的希望破灭了？显然，你已经被别人捷足先登了。”
“我没有被捷足先登，我是遭到了背叛。我的军官受到挑拨，他们拒绝为一名女子而战，只肯效忠他们的老主子——这违背了一切的历史和理性。而且，他们这些不折不扣的叛徒，又坐视老主子被敌人捉去，使他无法再领导抵抗到底。”
她环顾四周，找到一张椅子坐下。“现在，帝国一定会继续衰败、死亡——就在我准备给它一个新生的时候。”
“我想，”铎丝说，“帝国避免了一场无限期的无端争战和破坏。用这点来安慰你自己吧，区长女士。”
芮喜尔仿佛没听到她的话：“这么多年的准备，竟然毁于一夕之间。”她坐在那里，仿佛被失败啃噬，一下老了二十岁。
铎丝说：“一夕之间不可能发生这种事。怂恿你的军官——假如真有此事——一定需要一段时间。”
“丹莫茨尔是此道高手，我显然低估了他。我不知道他究竟是怎么做到的——威胁、利诱，还是用似是而非的言论蛊惑煽动。他是玩弄阴谋和鼓动叛变的个中高手，我早就该知道的。”
顿了一下之后，她继续说：“如果这只是单纯的武力入侵，我将毫不费力地摧毁他派来的任何部队。谁会想到卫荷竟会遭到背叛，效忠的誓言那么轻易就被抛到一旁？”
谢顿不假思索，以理性的态度说：“但我猜想那些誓言的对象不是你，而是你的父亲。”
“荒謦！”芮喜尔中气十足地说，“当家父将区长职位交给我的时候——依法他有权这样做，任何对他效忠的誓言也自动被移交给我，这在过去有许多先例。照惯例，应该对新任统治者再宣誓一次，但那只是一种仪式，而不是必需的法律程序。我的军官都知道这点，可是他们故意忘记。他们以我是女流之辈作借口，因为他们想到帝国的报复就吓得发抖——假使他们忠贞不贰，根本不会有这种事；或者，因为他们想到对方应允的赏赐就贪婪得打颤——其实他们绝对得不到，如果我没看错丹莫茨尔的话。”
她猛然转向谢顿：“他要你，你可知道，丹莫茨尔攻打我们是为了你。”
谢顿吃了一惊：“我？为什么？”
“别傻了。他要你跟我要你的原因一样——当然是要拿你当工具。”她叹了一声，“至少我没有彻底遭到背叛，还能找到仍旧忠诚的战士——中士！”
爱玛•塔勒斯中士蹑手蹑脚地走进来，这种步伐与他的身躯似乎不太协调。他的制服一尘不染，金色的长八字胡弯曲得很厉害。
“区长女士。”他一面说，一面“啪”地一声立定站好。
他看起来仍是谢顿所谓的大块头——一个仍旧盲目服从命令，完全无视情势已有崭新变化的人。
芮喜尔对芮奇露出苦笑：“你好吗，小芮奇？我曾有意好好栽培你，现在似乎办不到了。”
“嗨，姑奶奶……女士。”芮奇笨拙地说。
“我也曾想好好栽培你，谢顿博士。”芮喜尔说，“而我也必须请你原谅，我已无能为力。”
“对我，女士，你不需要感到抱歉。”
“不，我必须跟你说抱歉。我不能就这样让丹莫茨尔得到你，那将使他获得一次太大的胜利．至少我能阻止这件事。”
“我不会为他工作，女士，我向你保证，就像我不会为你工作一样。”
“这不是为谁工作的问题，而是被谁利用的问题。永别了，谢顿博士——中士，轰掉他！”
中士立刻掏出手铳，铎丝随即大喊一声，同时猛力向前冲——谢顿却伸手抓住她的手肘，并且死命抓着不放。
“待在后面，铎丝，”他叫道，“否则他会杀你。他不会杀我的——你也一样，芮奇，站在后面，不要乱动。”
谢顿面向中士说：“你在犹豫。中士，因为你知道你不能发射。十天前我有机会杀你，但我没那样做。你当时曾以名誉对我担保，保证你会保护我。”
“你还在等什么？”芮喜尔怒吼道，“我说把他射倒，中士。”
谢顿不再说什么，他只是站在邡里。那位中士稳稳地握着于铣，瞄准着谢顿的头颅，他的双眼几乎要爆出来。
“我已经下达命令！”芮喜尔尖叫道。
“我拥有你的承诺。”谢顿以平静的口吻说。
塔勒斯中士则以哽咽的声音说：“怎么做都是名誉扫地。”他的手垂下来，手铳掉到地板上，发出了铿锵的声响。
芮喜尔高声喊道：“那么你也背叛了我！”
在谢顿能有所行动之前，在铎丝尚未挣脱他的双手之际，芮喜尔抓起那把手铳，将它对准中士，然后扣下扳机。
鲥顿以前从未见过什么人遭手铳轰击。然而，或许是这个武器的发音引起的联想，他一直以为会有一声巨响，以及血肉横飞的爆炸。：事实上，至少这把卫荷手铳并未造成那种效果。它对中士胸腔内的器官造成了什么样的搅扰，这点谢顿并不知道，但是中士在表情不变、未露出一丝痛苦神色的情况下，就倒在地上瘫成一团，成为一具毫无疑问也毫无希望的死尸。
芮喜尔转过手铣对准谢顿，从她坚决的表情看来，谢顿知道自己已经没有希望活过下一秒钟。
然而，就在中士倒地的那一刻，芮奇同时展开了行动。他跑到谢顿与芮喜尔之间，举起双手疯狂地挥动。
“姑奶奶，姑奶奶，”他叫道，“别发射。”
一时之间，芮喜尔看来相当为难。“闪开，芮奇，我不想伤害你。”
这片刻的迟疑正是铎丝所需要的。她猛力挣脱谢顿，贴地俯冲撞向芮喜尔。芮喜尔大叫一声，随即仆倒在地，那把手铳再度落到地板上。
芮奇赶紧将它夺过来。
谢顿颤抖地吁了口长气，然后说：“芮奇，把它给我。”
芮奇却向后退去：“你不是要杀掉她吧，啊，谢顿先生？她对我不错。”
“我不会杀害任何人，芮奇。”谢顿说，“她杀了那名中士，而且正准备杀我，但她由于不愿伤你而未发射。看在这个分上，我们会让她活下去。”
现在轮到谢顿坐在椅子上，手中轻轻握着那把手铳。铎丝则从中士尸体上另一个皮套中取走神经鞭。
一个新的声音突然响起：“把她交给我处理吧，谢顿。”
谢顿抬起头来，以惊喜的声音说：“夫铭！你终于来了！”
“我很抱歉花了那么久时间，谢顿，但我有很多事要做。你好吗，凡纳比里博士？我猜这就是曼尼克斯的女儿，芮喜尔。可是这个男孩是谁？”
“芮奇来自达尔，是我们的小朋友。”埘顿说。
一队上兵鱼贯而入，夫铭做了一个小手势之后，他们便以尊敬的态度扶起芮喜尔。
铎丝终于不必目不转睛地监视着那个女人，她用双手理了理自己的衣服，并把上衣稍微拉平。谢顿突然意识到自己仍穿着浴袍。
芮喜尔轻蔑地挣脱了身旁的士兵，指着夫铭对谢顿说：“这是谁？”
谢顿说：“他是契特•夫铭，我的一个朋友，也是我在本行星上的保护者。”
“你的保护者？”芮喜尔纵声狂笑，“你这个傻瓜！你这个白痴！这个人就是丹莫茨尔。如果你看看你的女人凡纳比里，你会从她的脸上看出来，她对这点心知肚明。你从头到尾都陷在一个圈套里，比在我的圈套中还要糟得多！”
Chapter 90

Hummin and Seldon sat at lunch that day, quite alone, a pall of quiet between them for the most part. It was toward the end of the meal that Seldon stirred and said in a lively voice, "Well, sir, how do I address you? I think of you as Chester Hummin still, but even if I accept you in your other persona, I surely cannot address you as Eto Demerzel. In that capacity, you have a title and I dont know the proper usage. Instruct me."
The other said gravely, "Call me Hummin--if you dont mind. Or Chetter. Yes, I am Eto Demerzel, but with respect to you I am Hummin. As a matter of fact, the two are not distinct. I told you that the Empire is decaying and failing. I believe that to be true in both my capacities. I told you that I wanted psychohistory as a way of preventing that decay and failure or of bringing about a renewal and reinvigoration if the decay and failure must run its course. I believe that in both my capacities too."
"But you had me in your grip--I presume you were in the vicinity when I had my meeting with His Imperial Majesty."
"With Cleon. Yes, of course."
"And you might have spoken to me, then, exactly as you later did as Hummin."
"And accomplished what? As Demerzel, I have enormous tasks. I have to handle Cleon, a well-meaning but not very capable ruler, and prevent him, insofar as I can, from making mistakes. I have to do my bit in governing Trantor and the Empire too. And, as you see, I had to spend a great deal of time in preventing Wye from doing harm."
"Yes, I know," murmured Seldon.
"It wasnt easy and I nearly lost out. I have spent years sparring carefully with Mannix, learning to understand his thinking and planning a countermove to his every move. I did not think, at any time, that while he was still alive he would pass on his powers to his daughter. I had not studied her and I was not prepared for her utter lack of caution. Unlike her father, she has been brought up to take power for granted and had no clear idea of its limitations. So she got you and forced me to act before I was quite ready."
"You almost lost me as a result. I faced the muzzle of a blaster twice."
"I know," said Hummin, nodding. "And we might have lost you Upperside too--another accident I could not foresee."
"But you havent really answered my question. Why did you send me chasing all over the face of Trantor to escape from Demerzel when you yourself were Demerzel?"
"You told Cleon that psychohistory was a purely theoretical concept, a kind of mathematical game that made no practical sense. That might indeed have been so, but if I approached you officially, I was sure you would merely have maintained your belief. Yet I was attracted to the notion of psychohistory. I wondered whether it might not be, after all, just a game. You must understand that I didnt want merely to use you, I wanted a real and practical psychohistory.
"So I sent you, as you put it, chasing all over the face of Trantor with the dreaded Demerzel close on your heels at all times. That, I felt, would concentrate your mind powerfully. It would make psychohistory something exciting and much more than a mathematical game. You would try to work it out for the sincere idealist Hummin, where you would not for the Imperial flunky Demerzel. Also, you would get a glimpse of various sides of Trantor and that too would be helpful--certainly more helpful than living in an ivory tower on a far-off planet, surrounded entirely by fellow mathematicians. Was I right? Have you made progress?"
Seldon said, "In psychohistory? Yes, I did, Hummin. I thought you knew."
"How should I know?"
"I told Dors."
"But you hadnt told me. Nevertheless, you tell me so now. That is good news."
"Not entirely," said Seldon. "I have made only the barest beginning. But it is a beginning."
"Is it the kind of beginning that can be explained to a nonmathematician?"
"I think so. You see, Hummin, from the start I have seen psychohistory as a science that depends on the interaction of twenty-five million worlds, each with an average population of four thousand million. Its too much. Theres no way of handling something that complex. If I was to succeed at all, if there was to be any way of finding a useful psychohistory, I would first have to find a simpler system.
"So I thought I would go back in time and deal with a single world, a world that was the only one occupied by humanity in the dim age before the colonization of the Galaxy. In Mycogen they spoke of an original world of Aurora and in Dahl I heard word of an original world of Earth. I thought they might be the same world under different names, but they were sufficiently different in one key point, at least, to make that impossible. And it didnt matter. So little was known of either one, and that little so obscured by myth and legend, that there was no hope of making use of psychohistory in connection with them."
He paused to sip at his cold juice, keeping his eyes firmly on Hummins face.
Hummin said, "Well? What then?"
"Meanwhile, Dors had told me something I call the hand-on-thigh story. It was of no innate significance, merely a humorous and entirely trivial tale. As a result, though, Dors mentioned the different sex mores on various worlds and in various sectors of Trantor. It occurred to me that she treated the different Trantorian sectors as though they were separate worlds. I thought, idly, that instead of twenty-five million different worlds, I had twenty-five million plus eight hundred to deal with. It seemed a trivial difference, so I forgot it and thought no more about it.
"But as I traveled from the Imperial Sector to Streeling to Mycogen to Dahl to Wye, I observed for myself how different each was. The thought of Trantor--not as a world but as a complex of worlds--grew stronger, but still I didnt see the crucial point.
"It was only when I listened to Rashelle--you see, it was good that I was finally captured by Wye and it was good that Rashelles rashness drove her into the grandiose schemes that she imparted to me--When I listened to Rashelle, as I said, she told me that all she wanted was Trantor and some immediately adjacent worlds. It was an Empire in itself, she said, and dismissed the outer worlds as distant nothings.
"It was then that, in a moment, I saw what I must have been harboring in my hidden thoughts for a considerable time. On the one hand, Trantor possessed an extraordinarily complex social system, being a populous world made up of eight hundred smaller worlds. It was in itself a system complex enough to make psychohistory meaningful and yet it was simple enough, compared to the Empire as a whole, to make psychohistory perhaps practical.
"And the Outer Worlds, the twenty-five million of them? They were distant nothings. Of course, they affected Trantor and were affected by Trantor, but these were second-order effects. If I could make psychohistory work as a first approximation for Trantor alone, then the minor effects of the Outer Worlds could be added as later modifications. Do you see what I mean? I was searching for a single world on which to establish a practical science of psychohistory and I was searching for it in the far past, when all the time the single world I wanted was under my feet now."
Hummin said with obvious relief and pleasure, "Wonderful!"
"But its all left to do, Hummin. I must study Trantor in sufficient detail. I must devise the necessary mathematics to deal with it. If I am lucky and live out a full lifetime, I may have the answers before I die. If not, my successors will have to follow me. Conceivably, the Empire may have fallen and splintered before psychohistory becomes a useful technique."
"I will do everything I can to help you."
"I know it," said Seldon.
"You trust me, then, despite the fact I am Demerzel?"
"Entirely. Absolutely. But I do so because you are not Demerzel."
"But I am," insisted Hummin.
"But you are not. Your persona as Demerzel is as far removed from the truth as is your persona as Hummin."
"What do you mean?" Hummins eyes grew wide and he backed away slightly from Seldon.
"I mean that you probably chose the name Hummin out of a wry sense of what was fitting. Hummin is a mispronunciation of human, isnt it?" Hummin made no response. He continued to stare at Seldon.
And finally Seldon said, "Because youre not human, are you, Hummin/Demerzel? Youre a robot."
Dors
SELDON, HARI-- ... it is customary to think of Hari Seldon only in connection with psychohistory, to see him only as mathematics and social change personified. There is no doubt that he himself encouraged this for at no time in his formal writings did he give any hint as to how he came to solve the various problems of psychohistory. His leaps of thought might have all been plucked from air, for all he tells us. Nor does he tell us of the blind alleys into which he crept or the wrong turnings he may have made. ... 
As for his private life, it is a blank. Concerning his parents and siblings, we know a handful of factors, no more. His only son, Raych Seldon, is known to have been adopted, but how that came about is not known. Concerning his wife, we only know that she existed. Clearly, Seldon wanted to be a cipher except where psychohistory was concerned. It is as though he felt--or wanted it to be felt--that he did not live, he merely psychohistorified.
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第九十章
　　当天中午，夫铭与谢顿共进午餐，除此之外没有别人，大多数时间两人都沉默不语。
直到这一餐快结束时，谢顿才挪动了一下，以轻快的声音说：“好啦，阁下，我该如何称呼你？我仍然将你想成‘契特•夫铭’，但即使我接受你的另一个身份，我当然不能称呼你‘伊图•丹莫茨尔’。在那个身份之下，你拥有一个头衔，而我不知道正确的用法，教导我吧。”
对方以严肃的口吻说：“如果你不介意，就叫我‘夫铭’吧，或者‘契特’也行。是的，我就是伊图•丹莫茨尔，但是对你而言，我仍旧是夫铭。事实上，这两者没有分别。我曾经告诉你，帝国正在衰败和没落，我的两个身份都相信这是真的。我也告诉过你，我想要用心理史学预防这种衰败和没落；假若衰败和没落是一种无可避免的过程，就用它作为更新和复兴的工具。这点我的两个身份也都相信。”
“可是我一直在你的掌握中。我猜当我和皇帝陛下会谈时，你就在他附近。”
“你和克里昂会谈时？没错，当然。”
“那么，你当时应该就能跟我谈，就像你后来以夫铭的身份所做的那样。”
“那能有什么帮助呢？身为丹莫茨尔，我有数不清的工作。我必须应付克里昂，一个有善心却不是很能干的统治者，尽我所能地预防他犯错；我还得为治理川陀以及整个帝国尽一己之力。此外，你也看得出来，我当初得花上大量时间，预防卫荷造成任何伤害。”
“是的，我知道。”谢顿喃喃地说。
“这可不容易，我几乎失败了。我花了许多年的时间，谨慎地和曼尼克斯周旋，学习了解他的想法，对他的每一步行动策划出反制之道。我从来没有想到，他会在有生之年将权力传给他的女儿。我没研究过她，并未准备应付她全然鲁莽的行动。她和她的父亲不同，从小就将权力视为理所当然，对它的限度没有明确概念。所以她才会把你抓来，迫使我在准备妥当前采取行动。”
“结果使你几乎失去了我，我曾两度面对一把手铳的铳口。”
“我知道，”夫铭一面说一面点头，“我们在穹顶上也差点失去你，那是另一个我没有预见的意外。”
“可是你还没有真正回答我的问题。你自己就是丹莫茨尔，为何还要让我为了逃避丹莫茨尔而跑遍川陀表面？”
“你告诉克里昂说心理史学是纯粹的理论概念，是一种数学游戏，没有实质上的意义。这点或许的确是事实，但我如果以正式的身份询问你，我确定你只会坚持自己的信念。然而心理史学的想法吸引了我，我想知道它会不会不仅只是一种游戏。你一定了解我并非只要利用你，我想要的是真正的、可行的心理史学。
“所以正如你所说，我让你跑遍了川陀表面，而可怕的丹莫茨尔随时随地紧跟在后。我觉得这样一来，会让你的心智极度集中。它会使心理史学成为一种刺激的事物，而非只是个数学游戏。为了真诚的理想主义者夫铭，你会尝试将它发展出来，但你不会为皇帝的奴才丹莫茨尔这样做。此外，这样会让你窥见川陀不同的角落，而这同样有帮助——绝对比住在一颗遥远行星上的象牙塔中，身边全是同行的数学家更有帮助。我说得对吗？你有些进展了吗？”
谢顿说：“心理史学？是的，有了，夫铭。我以为你知道了。”
“我怎么会知道？”
“我告诉铎丝了。”
“但你没有告诉我。无论如何，你现在告诉了我。这是个好消息。”
“并不尽然，”谢顿说，“我仅仅跨出第一小步，但它的确是第一步。”
“这第一步能解释给非数学家听吗？”
“我想可以。你也知道，夫铭，最初的时候，我将心理史学视为由两千五百万个世界的互动所决定的科学，每个世界的平均人口为十几亿。那实在太多了，我们根本没有办法处理这么复杂的情况。假使我想要成功，假使我想找到一个通往实用心理史学的途径，首先我得找到一个较简单的系统。
“所以我曾经想到，我应该回溯过去，首先处理一个单一的世界。在人类尚未殖民银河的鸿蒙时期，它是唯一有人类居住的世界。在麦曲生，他们提到一个名叫奥罗拉的起源世界；而在达尔，我听说了一个叫做地球的起源世界。我曾想到它们可能是同一个世界的两个名字，但至少在一个关键上，两者具有充分的差异，使这个假设变得不可能。不过这不重要，我们对两者都只知道一点点，这一点点又被神话和传说混淆，根本没有希望利用心理史学研究它们。”
他顿了一下，啜了口冰果汁，双眼仍紧盯着夫铭的脸庞。
夫铭说：“嗯？后来呢？”
“与此同时，铎丝对我讲了一个我称之为毛手毛脚的故事。它没有什么本质上的意义，只是一个全然普通的幽默轶事。不过，铎丝因而提到各地不同的性爱风俗，包括各个世界和川陀上的各区。这使我想到，她将川陀不同的行政区视为独立的世界。我无端冒出一个念头，我要处理的不只是两千五百万个不同的世界，而是两千五百万再加上八百个。但这似乎毫无差别，所以我立刻把它抛到脑后，未曾再去想。
“可是，当我从皇区转到斯璀璘再转到麦曲生再转到达尔再转到卫荷，我自己观察到每个区的差别有多大。这使我越来越有那种感觉——川陀不是一个世界，而是许多世界的复合体。不过，我仍未看到真正的关键。
“直到我听了芮喜尔的一席话——你看，我最后被卫荷抓到其实是件好事；芮喜尔的轻率驱使她实现宏图也是件好事，她把一切计划与我分享——我刚才要说的是，她告诉我说她要的只有川陀，以及邻近的几个世界而已。川陀本身就是一个帝国，她这么说，并对遥远的外星世界嗤之以鼻，将他们视为‘等于并不存在’。
“就是在那一刻，我看见了一定被我深藏在思想中好一段时间的灵感。川陀拥有格外复杂的社会结构，是由八百个小世界组成的一个人口众多的大世界。它本身就是一个足够复杂的系统，足以使得心理史学具有意义；可是跟整个帝国相比，它又足够简单，或许能使心理史学成为可行。
“至于那此外围世界，那两千五百万个世界呢？它们‘等于并不存在’。当然，它们会对川陀造成影响，也会受到川陀的影响，但那些是二阶效应。如果我能让心理史学成为对川陀本身的一阶的近似描述，那么外围世界的微小影响可在事后再加进来，作为一种二阶修正。你懂我的意思吗？我一直在寻找一个单一世界。以便在其上建立一个实用的心理史学，我不断在遥远的过去寻找，其实我要的那个世界始终都在我的脚下。”
夫铭带着明显的宽心与喜悦说：“太好了！”
“可是一切都有待努力，夫铭，我必须将川陀研究得足够仔细，我必须发明必要的数学处理它。如果我运气够好，可以活完这一辈子，也许能在去世之前找到答案。如果不行，我的后继者必须再接再厉。可以想象得到，在心理史学成为一个有用的理论之前，帝国或许已经衰亡与分裂。”
“我会尽一切力量帮你。”
“我知道。”谢顿说。
“这么说，你相信我——尽管我的真实身份是丹莫茨尔。”
“全然相信，绝对相信。不过我这么做，是因为你并非丹莫扶尔。”
“但我的确是啊！”夫铭坚持道。
“但你其实不是。跟你的真实身份比较起来，你丹莫茨尔的角色远不如夫铭这个身份。”
“你是什么意思？”夫铭睁大双眼，身了微微后仰。
“我的意思是说，你选择‘夫铭’这个名字，也许是出于一种自我解嘲的幽默感。‘夫铭’脱胎于‘人名’，是吗？”
夫铭未做出响应，他继续凝视着谢顿。
最后谢谢终于说：“因为你不是人，对不对，夫铭——或者丹莫茨尔？你是个机器人。”
Chapter 91
Hummin sat calmly, not a muscle twitching, still looking at Hari Seldon and Seldon, for his part, waited. It was Hummin, he thought, who should speak next.
Hummin did, but said merely, "A robot? Me?--By robot, I presume you mean an artificial being such as the object you saw in the Sacratorium in Mycogen."
"Not quite like that," said Seldon.
"Not metal? Not burnished? Not a lifeless simulacrum?" Hummin said it without any evidence of amusement.
"No. To be of artificial life is not necessarily to be made of metal. I speak of a robot indistinguishable from a human being in appearance.. "If indistinguishable, Hari, then how do you distinguish?"
"Not by appearance."
"Explain."
"Hummin, in the course of my flight from yourself as Demerzel, I heard of two ancient worlds, as I told you--Aurora and Earth. Each seemed to be spoken of as a first world or an only world. In both cases, robots were spoken of, but with a difference."
Seldon was staring thoughtfully at the man across the table, wondering if, in any way, he would give some sign that he was less than a man--or more. He said, "Where Aurora was in question, one robot was spoken of as a renegade, a traitor, someone who deserted the cause. Where Earth was in question, one robot was spoken of as a hero, one who represented salvation. Was it too much to suppose that it was the same robot?"
"Was it?" murmured Hummin.
"This is what I thought, Hummin. I thought that Earth and Aurora were two separate worlds, co-existing in time. I dont know which one preceded the other. From the arrogance and the conscious sense of superiority of the Mycogenians, I might suppose that Aurora was the original world and that they despised the Earthmen who derived from them--or who degenerated from them.
"On the other hand, Mother Rittah, who spoke to me of Earth, was convinced that Earth was the original home of humanity and, certainly, the tiny and isolated position of the Mycogenians in a whole galaxy of quadrillions of people who lack the strange Mycogenian ethos might mean that Earth was indeed the original home and that Aurora was the aberrant offshoot. I cannot tell, but I pass on to you my thinking, so that you will understand my final conclusions."
Hummin nodded. "I see what you are doing. Please continue."
"The worlds were enemies. Mother Rittah certainly made it sound so. When I compare the Mycogenians, who seem to embody Aurora, and the Dahlites, who seem to embody Earth, I imagine that Aurora, whether first or second, was nevertheless the one that was more advanced, the one that could produce more elaborate robots, even ones indistinguishable from human beings in appearance. Such a robot was designed and devised in Aurora, then. But he was a renegade, so he deserted Aurora. To the Earthpeople he was a hero, so he must have joined Earth. Why he did this, what his motives were, I cant say."
Hummin said, "Surely, you mean why it did this, what its motives were."
"Perhaps, but with you sitting across from me," said Seldon, "I find it difficult to use the inanimate pronoun. Mother Rittah was convinced that the heroic robot--her heroic robot--still existed, that he would return when he was needed. It seemed to me that there was nothing impossible in the thought of an immortal robot or at least one who was immortal as long as the replacement of worn-out parts was not neglected."
"Even the brain?" asked Hummin.
"Even the brain. I dont really know anything about robots, but I imagine a new brain could be re-recorded from the old.--And Mother Rittah hinted of strange mental powers.--I thought: It must be so. I may, in some ways, be a romantic, but I am not so much a romantic as to think that one robot, by switching from one side to the other, can alter the course of history. A robot could not make Earths victory sure, nor Auroras defeat certain--unless there was something strange, something peculiar about the robot."
Hummin said, "Does it occur to you, Hari, that you are dealing with legends, legends that may have been distorted over the centuries and the millennia, even to the extent of building a veil of the supernatural over quite ordinary events? Can you make yourself believe in a robot that not only seems human, but that also lives forever and has mental powers? Are you not beginning to believe in the superhuman?"
"I know very well what legends are and I am not one to be taken in by them and made to believe in fairy tales. Still, when they are supported by certain odd events that I have seen--and even experienced myself--"
"Such as?"
"Hummin, I met you and trusted you from the start. Yes, you helped me against those two hoodlums when you didnt need to and that predisposed me in your favor, since I didnt realize at the time that they were your hirelings, doing what you had instructed them to do.--But never mind that."
"No," said Hummin, a hint of amusement--finally--in his voice.
"I trusted you. I was easily convinced not to go home to Helicon and to make myself a wanderer over the face of Trantor. I believed everything you told me without question. I placed myself entirely in your hands. Looking back on it now, I see myself as not myself. I am not a person to be so easily led, yet I was. More than that, I did not even think it strange that I was behaving so far out of character."
"You know yourself best, Hari."
"It wasnt only me. How is it that Dors Venabili, a beautiful woman with a career of her own, should abandon that career in order to join me in my flight? How is it that she should risk her life to save mine, seeming to take on, as a kind of holy duty, the cask of protecting me and becoming single-minded in the process? Was it simply because you asked her to?"
"I did ask her to, Hari."
"Yet she does not strike me as the kind of person to make such a radical changeover in her life merely because someone asks her to. Nor could I believe it was because she had fallen madly in love with me at first sight and could not help herself. I somehow wish she had, but she seems quite the mistress of her emotional self, more--I am now speaking to you frankly--than I myself am with respect to her."
"She is a wonderful woman," said Hummin. "I dont blame you."
Seldon went on. "How is it, moreover, that Sunmaster Fourteen, a monster of arrogance and one who leads a people who are themselves stiff-necked in their own conceit, should be willing to take in tribespeople like Dors and myself and to treat us as well as the Mycogenians could and did? When we broke every rule, committed every sacrilege, how is it that you could still talk him into letting us go?
"How could you talk the Tisalvers, with their petty prejudices, into taking us in? How can you be at home everywhere in the world, be friends with everyone, influence each person, regardless of their individual peculiarities? For that matter, how do you manage to manipulate Cleon too? And if he is viewed as malleable and easily molded, then how were you able to handle his father, who by all accounts was a rough and arbitrary tyrant? How could you do all this?
"Most of all, how is it that Mannix IV of Wye could spend decades building an army without peer, one trained to be proficient in every detail, and yet have it fall apart when his daughter tries to make use of it? How could you persuade them to play the Renegade, all of them, as you have done?"
Hummin said, "Might this mean no more than that I am a tactful person used to dealing with people of different types, that I am in a position to have done favors for crucial people and am in a position to do additional favors in the future? Nothing I have done, it might seem, requires the supernatural."
"Nothing you have done? Not even the neutralization of the Wyan army?"
"They did not wish to serve a woman."
"They must have known for years that any time Mannix laid down his powers or any time he died, Rashelle would be their Mayor, yet they showed no signs of discontent--until you felt it necessary that they show it. Dors described you at one time as a very persuasive man. And so you are. More persuasive than any man could be. But you are not more persuasive than an immortal robot with strange mental powers might be.--Well, Hummin?"
Hummin said, "What is it you expect of me, Hari? Do you expect me to admit Im a robot? That I only look like a human being? That I am immortal? That I am a mental marvel?!"
Seldon leaned toward Hummin as he sat there on the opposite side of the table. "Yes, Hummin, I do. I expect you to tell me the truth and I strongly suspect that what you have just outlined is the truth. You, Hummin, are the robot that Mother Rittah referred to as Da-Nee, friend of Ba-Lee. You must admit it. You have no choice."
第九十一章
第十九部 铎丝
哈里•谢顿：……习惯上人们仅将哈里•谢顿与心理史学联想在一起，视之为拟人化的数学与社会变迁。他本人也鼓励这种倾向，这点毋庸置疑，因为在正式著作中，他从未透露解出心理史学各种问题的任何线索。
根据他所告诉我们的，他的思想跃进或许都是无中生有。
至于他曾摸索过的死胡同。或是曾经做过的错误转折，他始终没有让我们知道。
……他的私生活则是一片空白。有关他的双亲与手足，我们仅有很简单的信息。
众所周知，他的独子芮奇•谢顿是领养的，但过程如何却无人知晓。至于他的妻子，我们只知道有这个人存在。
显然，除了有关心理史学的事物，谢顿有意成为一个毫不起眼的人。仿佛在他的感觉中——或是想要造成一种感觉——他不曾活在世上，而只是心理史学的化身。
——《银河百科全书》


第九十一章
夫铭冷静地坐在那里，仍目不转睛地望着哈里•谢顿，没有任何一根肌肉在拙动。谢顿则耐心等待，他想，下一个可口的人应该是夫铭。
大铭终于开口，不过他只是说：“一个机器人？我？所谓的机器人，我猜你是指人造人，像你在麦曲生圣堂中见到的那种东西。”
“并非完全像那样。”谢顿说。
“不是金属制品？不会熠熠生辉？不是一个无生命的拟像？”犬铭的话中未透出一丝兴味。
“不，人工生命不一定只限于金属制品。我说的是外形上和人类无法区分的机器人。”
“假如无法区分，哈里，那你又如何区分呢？”
“不是借着外形。”
“解释一下。”
“夫铭，在我逃避你的另一个身份——丹莫茨尔的过程中，我听说了两个古老的世界，我告诉过你，就是奥罗拉和地球。它们似乎都被说成是第一个世界，或是唯一的世界。两者都提到了机器人，但其中有一点不同。”
谢顿若有所思地凝视着餐桌对面这名男子，寻思他是否会在任何方面显露某种迹象，显出他比人类少了点——或是多了点什么。“在奥罗拉的故事中，有个机器人被说成抛弃目标的变节者、叛徒。而在地球的故事中，有个机器人被说成拯救世人的英雄。假设这两者是同一个机器人会不会太不可思议？”
“它是吗？”夫铭喃喃问道。
“我是这么想的，夫铭。我想地球和奥罗拉是两个不同的世界，曾经同时存在。我不知道哪个在先，哪个在后。从麦曲生人的自大和优越感判断，我应该假设奥罗拉是起源世界，而他们所鄙视的地球人，则是衍生自他们——或是由他们退化而来。
“另一方面，瑞塔嬷嬷，就是跟我提到地球的人，却深信地球才是人类的故乡。当然，整个银河拥有万兆人口，只有麦曲生人拥有那种奇异的民族性，他们这种微小、封闭的地位，或许正代表地球的确是人类的故乡，而奥罗拉则是旁门左道的支系。我无法做出判断，但我将自己的思考过程告诉你，好让你能了解我最后的结论。”
夫铭点了点头：“我看得出你在做什么，请继续。”
“这两个世界是仇家，瑞塔嬷嬷的话听来绝对是这个意思。麦曲生人似乎是奥罗拉的化身，而达尔人似乎是地球的化身，在我比较这两族人的时候，我猜想奥罗拉不论是先是后，无论如何是个较先进的世界，能生产较精致的机器人，它们甚至在外形上无法和人类区分。所以说，那个机器人是在奥罗拉设计发明的。但他是个变节者，所以他遗弃了奥罗拉。对地球人而言，他则是个英雄，所以他必定加入了地球。他为什么那样做，他的动机是什么，我却说不出来。”
夫铭说：“当然，你的意思是‘它’为什么那样做，它的动机是什么。”
“或许吧，但有你坐在我对面，”谢顿说，“我发觉使用无生命代名词颇有困难。瑞塔嬷嬷深信那个英雄机器人——她的英雄机器人——至今仍旧存在，他会在必要的时刻重返人间。在我看来，想象一个不朽的机器人，或者只要不忘更换磨损零件即可不朽的机器人，是一件毫无困难的事。”
“甚至于头脑？”夫铭问道。
“甚至于头脑。我对机器人其实一点都不了解，但我想象新的头脑可从旧的那里录取所有的记录。瑞塔嬷嬷还暗示了一种奇异的精神力量，我就想到：一定是这样的。在某些方面，我也许是个浪漫的人，但我还不至于浪漫到会相信一个机器人在转换阵营后，就能改变历史的发展。一个机器人无法确定地球的胜利，也无法保证奥罗拉的败北——除非这个机器人有什么古怪，有什么奇特的能力，”
夫铭说：“你有没有想到过，哈里，你是在研究一些传说，可能经过数世纪、数千年扭曲的传说？它们甚至扭曲到了在相当普通的事件上，都筑起一重超自然帷幕的程度。你能让自己相信一个机器人不但酷似人类，而且，寿命无尽并具有精神力量吗？你这不是开始相信超人了吗？”
“我对于什么是传说知道得很清楚，我不会被它们欺骗，也不会相信什么童话故事。然而，当某些古怪事件支持它们，而那些事件是我亲眼目睹，甚至亲身经验时……”
“比如说？”
“夫铭，我和你不期而遇，打从一开始就信任你。没错，在你根本不需要介入时，你帮我对付那两个小流氓，使我对你产生好感，因为当时我不了解他们其实受雇于你，遵照你的指示办事——不过，那你不用介意。”
“我不会。”夫铭说，他的声音终于透出一丝兴味。
“我信任你。我很容易就被说服，决定不回赫利肯家乡，而让自己在川陀表面到处流浪。你告诉我的每件事，我都毫无疑问地照单全收。如今回想起来，我发现那简直不是我。我不是那么容易被牵着鼻子走的人，但我的表现就是那样。尤有甚者，我的行为虽然那么异常，我甚至不觉得有什么奇怪。”
“你最了解你自己，哈里。”
“不只是我而已，铎丝•凡纳比里又如何？她是个美丽的女子，拥有自己的职业，竟然为了陪我逃亡而放弃教职。她怎么会冒着生命危险拯救我？还把保护我视为一种神圣的使命，从头到尾始终如一？只是因为你要求她那么做吗？”
“我的确要求过她，哈里。”
“然而她给我的印象，并非那种仅仅由于某人要求她，就会做出生命中如此彻底转变的人。我也无法相信，这是因为她第一眼就疯狂地爱上我，从此再也无法自拔——虽然我多少有些希望这是真的。但她似乎相当能控制自己的感情，而我——我现在坦白跟你讲——我对她的感情却没那么容易控制。”
“她是个了不起的女性，”夫铭说，“我不怪你。”
谢顿继续说道：“此外，日主十四又如何？他是个自大狂，领导着一群顽固地拥抱自负幻想的人。他竟然愿意收容像铎丝和我这样的外族人，而且尽麦曲生人一切可能、一切力量款待我们。在我们违反了所有的规定、触犯了每一条亵渎罪之后，你如何仍能说服他将我们放走？
“堤沙佛一家既小气又充满偏见，你怎么能说服他们收留我们？你怎么能对这个世界各个角落那么熟悉，和每一个人交朋友，影响每一个人，不论他们有什么特殊的秉性？说到这一点，你怎么也有办法操纵克里昂？即使他可视为柔顺且具可塑性，那你又如何能应付他的父亲，他在任何方面都是个粗暴专横的暴君？你怎么能做到这一切？
“最重要的是，卫荷的曼尼克斯四世花了数十年的心血，建立起一支无敌的军队，各方面的训练都精良无比，但是当他的女儿试图动用时，它却立刻四分五裂？你怎么能劝说他们步你的后尘，让他们全部扮演起变节者？”
夫铭说：“这难道不能说是我的手腕圆滑，习惯于应付各种不同类型的人；我有能力施恩于重要人物，将来也有能力继续眷顺他们？我做的这一切，似乎都不需要超自然的力量。”
“你做的一切？甚至包括瓦解卫荷的军队？”
“他们不希望效忠一名女性。”
“过去许多年来，他们一定知道，不论曼尼克斯何时放下他的权力，或是不论他何时去世，芮喜尔立刻会成为他们的区长，但他们并未显露不满的迹象——直到你觉得有必要让他们显露出来。有一次，铎丝将你说成是个非常具有说服力的人。你的确如此，比任何‘人’都更具说眼力。但和一个具有奇异精神力量的不朽机器人相比，你的说服力不算什么——如何，夫铭？”
“你指望我说什么，哈里？你指望我承认自己是个机器人？只是外表看来像人类？我是不朽的？我是个金属的奇珍？”
谢顿将上半身凑向夫铭：“是的，夫铭，我就是这个意思。我指望你告诉我真相，而我强烈怀疑你刚说的那些就是真相。你，夫铭，就是瑞塔嬷嬷口中的那个机器人丹尼——贝雳的朋友。你必须承以，你无法回避。”
Chapter 92

It was as though they were sitting in a tiny Universe of their own. There, in the middle of Wye, with the Wyan army being disarmed by Imperial force, they sat quietly. There, in the midst of events that all of Trantor--and perhaps all the Galaxy--was watching, there was this small bubble of utter isolation within which Seldon and Hummin were playing their game of attack and defense--Seldon trying hard to force a new reality, Hummin making no move to accept that new reality. Seldon had no fear of interruption. He was certain that the bubble within which they sat had a boundary that could not be penetrated, that Hummins--no, the robots--powers would keep all at a distance till the game was over.
Hummin finally said, "You are an ingenious fellow, Hari, but I fail to see why I must admit that I am a robot and why I have no choice but to do so. Everything you say may be true as facts--your own behavior, Dorss behavior, Sunmasters, Tisalvers, the Wyan generals--all, all may have happened as you said, but that doesnt force your interpretation of the meaning of the events to be true. Surely, everything that happened can have a natural explanation. You trusted me because you accepted what I said; Dors felt your safety to be important because she felt psychohistory to be crucial, herself being a historian; Sunmaster and Tisalver were beholden to me for favors you know nothing of, the Wyan generals resented being ruled by a woman, no more. Why must we flee to the supernatural?"
Seldon said, "See here, Hummin, do you really believe the Empire to be falling and do you really consider it important that it not be allowed to do so with no move made to save it or, at the least, cushion its Fall?"
"I really do." Somehow Seldon knew this statement was sincere. "And you really want me to work out the details of psychohistory and you feel that you yourself cannot do it?"
"I lack the capability."
"And you feel that only I can handle psychohistory--even if I sometimes doubt it myself?"
"Yes."
"And you must therefore feel that if you can possibly help me in any way, you must."
"I do."
"Personal feelings--selfish considerations--could play no part?" A faint and brief smile passed over Hummins grave face and for a moment Seldon sensed a vast and arid desert of weariness behind Hummins quiet manner. "I have built a long career on paying no heed to personal feelings or to selfish considerations."
"Then I ask your help. I can work out psychohistory on the basis of Trantor alone, but I will run into difficulties. Those difficulties I may overcome, but how much easier it would be to do so if I knew certain key facts. For instance, was Earth or Aurora the first world of humanity or was it some other world altogether? What was the relationship between Earth and Aurora? Did either or both colonize the Galaxy? If one, why didnt the other? If both, how was the issue decided? Are there worlds descended from both or from only one? How did robots come to be abandoned? How did Trantor become the Imperial world, rather than another planet? What happened to Aurora and Earth in the meantime? There are a thousand questions I might ask right now and a hundred thousand that might arise as I go along. Would you allow me to remain ignorant, Hummin, and fail in my task when you could inform me and help me succeed?"
Hummin said, "If I were the robot, would I have room in my brain for all of twenty thousand years of history for millions of different worlds?"
"I dont know the capacity of robotic brains. I dont know the capacity of yours. But if you lack the capacity, then you must have that information which you cannot hold safely recorded in a place and in a way that would make it possible for you to call upon it. And if you have it and I need information, how can you deny and withhold it from me? And if you cannot withhold it from me, how can you deny that you are a robot--that robot the Renegade?"
Seldon sat back and took a deep breath. "So I ask you again: Are you that robot? If you want psychohistory, then you must admit it. If you still deny you are a robot and if you convince me you are not, then my chances at psychohistory become much, much smaller. It is up to you, then. Are you a robot? Are you Da-Nee?"
And Hummin said, as imperturbable as ever. "Your arguments are irrefutable. I am R. Daneel Olivaw. The R stands for robot. "
第九十二章
　　他们仿佛坐在仅由两人构成的小宇宙中。卫荷的军队已被帝国部队缴械，而在卫荷的心脏地带，他们平静地坐在那里。整个川陀——或许整个银河都在注视这个事件，而事件的中心却存在着一个完全与世隔绝的小泡沫，能让谢顿与夫铭在其中进行他们的攻守游戏——谢顿试着提出一个新的推断，而夫铭则准备否决。
谢顿不怕遭到干扰，他确定这个泡沫有个无法穿透的边界。在这场游戏结束前，夫铭的——不，这个机器人的力量，会将所有人挡在一定距离之外。
夫铭终于开口：“你是个聪明人，哈里，但我看不出我为何必须承认自己是个机器人，以及我为何无法回避。你说的每件事或许都是事实——你自己的行为、铎丝的行为、日主的、堤沙佛的、卫荷将军们的——一切的一切或许都如你所说，但这不等于你对这些事件的诠释就是事实。不用说，发生过的每一件事都有个自然的解释：你信任我，是因为你接受我的话；铎丝觉得你的安全很重要，是因为身为一位历史学家，她感到心理史学事关重大；日主和堤沙佛曾受过我的恩惠，其中的详情你一无所知；卫荷的将军们憎恨被一个女人统治，如此而已。我们为什么一定耍将这一切归于借超自然？”
谢顿说：“听好，夫铭，你真相信帝国正在衰亡吗？你真认为绝不能坐视，不可不进行拯救它的行动——或是至少减轻衰亡的冲击吗？”
“我的确这么想。”无论如何，谢顿知道这句话是真诚的。
“你真要我发展出心理史学的细节，你觉得自已无法做到？”
“我缺乏这个能力。”
“而你觉得只有我才能处理心理史学——即使我自己有时也怀疑这点？”
“是的。”
“那么你一定也会觉得，无论我碰到什么闻难，只要有可能，你都必须尽全力帮我。”
“我是这么想。”
“个人的感情——自我中心的考虑，不会造成任何影响？”
夫铭严肃的脸庞掠过一丝含糊而短暂的笑容，刹那间，谢顿察觉到，在夫铭沉稳的态度后面，隐藏着一大片疲惫、饥渴的荒漠。“长久以来，我一直不曾留意个人感情或自我中心的考虑。”
“那么我请求你帮助我。我可以仅以川陀为根据来发展心理史学，但这么做必定有很多困难。我或许能克服那些困难，但若能知道某些关键的事实，问题不知道会简单多少。譬如说，地球或奥罗拉是不是人类的第一个世界，或者那根本是另一个世界？地球和奥罗拉的关系如何？是否其中哪个或两者皆曾殖民银河？如果只有一个，另一个为什么没有？如果两者皆有，最后的结果如何？如今这些世界是源自两者或其中之一？机器人如何遭到废弃？川陀如何变成京畿世界，为什么不是别的行星？奥罗拉和地球后来发生了什么变故？现在我就可能提出一千个问题，而在我的研究过程中，还可能冒诚十万个问题来。在你能为我提供答案，帮助我成功的时候，夫铭，你会让我始终懵懵懂懂，而眼睁睁看我失败吗？”
夫铭说：“假使我真是那个机器人，我的脑子可能会有足够空间，能贮存千万个不同的世界、整整两万年的所有历史吗？”
“我不知道机器人的脑容量有多少，我也不知道你的脑子可容纳多少记忆。但是如果容量不够，你一定已将那些无法安然保存的数据录在别处，而且有办法随时查取。如果你拥有它，我又需要那些数据，你怎能拒绝而对我有所保留？假使你不会对我有所保留，你又怎能拒绝承认自己是个机器人——那个机器人——那个变节者？”
谢顿靠回椅子上，深深吸了一口气：“所以我再问你一遍：你是不是那个机器人？你若是要心理史学，你就必须承认。如果你仍旧否认你是个机器人，如果你使我相信你不是，那我完成心理史学的机会将小得太多太多，所以，一切看你了。你是个机器人吗？你就是丹尼吗？”
夫铭以一如往昔的泰然口吻说：“你的论点无懈可击。我名叫Ｒ•丹尼尔•奥利瓦，其中‘Ｒ’便代表机器人。”
Chapter 93

R. Daneel Olivaw still spoke quietly, but it seemed to Seldon that there was a subtle change in his voice, as though he spoke more easily now that he was no longer playing a part.
"In twenty thousand years," said Daneel, "no one has guessed I was a robot when it was not my intention to have him or her know. In part, that was because human beings abandoned robots so long ago that very few remember that they even existed at one time. And in part, it is because I do have the ability to detect and affect human emotion. The detection offers no trouble, but to affect emotion is difficult for me for reasons having to do with my robotic nature--although I can do it when I wish. I have the ability but must deal with my will not to use it. I try never to interfere except when I have no choice but to do so. And when I do interfere, it is rarely that I do more than strengthen, as little as I can, what is already there. If I can achieve my purposes without doing even so much, I avoid it.
"It was not necessary to tamper with Sunmaster Fourteen in order to have him accept you--I call it tampering, you notice, because it is not a pleasant thing to do. I did not have to tamper with him because he did owe me for favors rendered and he is an honorable man, despite the peculiarities you found in him. I did interfere the second time, when you had committed sacrilege in his eyes, but it took very little. He was not anxious to hand you over to the Imperial authorities, whom he does not like. I merely strengthened the dislike a trifle and he handed you over to my care, accepting the arguments I offered, which otherwise he might have considered specious.
"Nor did I tamper with you noticeably. You distrusted the Imperials too. Most human beings do these days, which is an important factor in the decay and deterioration of the Empire. Whats more, you were proud of psychohistory as a concept, proud of having thought of it. You would not have minded having it prove to be a practical discipline. That would have further fed your pride." Seldon frowned and said, "Pardon me, Master Robot, but I am not aware that I am quite such a monster of pride."
Daneel said mildly, "You are not a monster of pride at all. You are perfectly aware that [it] is neither admirable nor useful to be driven by pride, so you try to subdue that drive, but you might as well disapprove of having yourself powered by your heartbeat. You cannot help either fact. Though you hide your pride from yourself for the sake of your own peace of mind, you cannot hide it from me. It is there, however carefully you mask it over. And I had but to strengthen it a touch and you were at once willing to take measures to hide from Demerzel, measures that a moment before you would have resisted. And you were eager to work at psychohistory with an intensity that a moment before you would have scorned.
"I saw no necessity to touch anything else and so you have reasoned out your robothood. Had I foreseen the possibility of that, I might have stopped it, but my foresight and my abilities are not infinite. Nor am I sorry now that I failed, for your arguments are good ones and it is important that you know who I am and that I use what I am to help you.
"Emotions, my dear Seldon are a powerful engine of human action, far more powerful than human beings themselves realize, and you cannot know how much can be done with the merest touch and how reluctant I am to do it."
Seldon was breathing heavily, trying to see himself as a man driven by pride and not liking it. "Why reluctant?"
"Because it would be so easy to overdo. I had to stop Rashelle from converting the Empire into a feudal anarchy. I might have bent minds quickly and the result might well have been a bloody uprising. Men are men--and the Wyan generals are almost all men. It does not actually take much to rouse resentment and latent fear of women in any man. It may be a biological matter that I, as a robot, cannot fully understand.
"I had but to strengthen the feeling to produce a breakdown in her plans. If I had done it the merest millimeter too much, I would have lost what I wanted--a bloodless takeover. I wanted nothing more than to have them not resist when my soldiers arrived."
Daneel paused, as though trying to pick his words, then said, "I do not wish to go into the mathematics of my positronic brain. It is more than I can understand, though perhaps not more than you can if you give it enough thought. However, I am governed by the Three Laws of Robotics that are traditionally put into words--or once were, long ago. They are these:
" One. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm.
" Two. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings, except where such orders would conflict with the First Law.
" Three. A robot must protect its own existence, as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Law.
"But I had a ... a friend twenty thousand years ago. Another robot. Not like myself. He could not be mistaken for a human being, but it was he who had the mental powers and it was through him that I gained mine. "It seemed to him that there should be a still more general rule than any of the Three Laws. He called it the Zeroth Law, since zero comes before one. It is:
" Zero. A robot may not injure humanity or, through inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.
"Then the First Law must read:
" One. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm, except where that would conflict with the Zeroth Law.
"And the other laws must be similarly modified. Do you understand?"
Daneel paused earnestly and Seldon said, "I understand." Daneel went on. "The trouble is, Hari, that a human being is easy to identify. I can point to one. It is easy to see what will harm a human being and what wont--relatively easy, at least. But what is humanity? To what can we point when we speak of humanity? And how can we define harm to humanity? When will a course of action do more good than harm to humanity as a whole and how can one tell? The robot who first advanced the Zeroth law died--became permanently inactive--because he was forced into an action that he felt would save humanity, yet which he could not be sure would save humanity. And as he became inactivated, he left the care of the Galaxy to me.
"Since then, I have tried. I have interfered as little as possible, relying on human beings themselves to judge what was for the good. They could gamble; I could not. They could miss their goals; I did not dare. They could do harm unwittingly; I would grow inactive if I did. The Zeroth Law makes no allowance for unwitting harm.
"But at times I am forced to take action. That I am still functioning shows that my actions have been moderate and discreet. However, as the Empire began to fail and to decline, I have had to interfere more frequently and for decades now I have had to play the role of Demerzel, trying to run the government in such a way as to stave off ruin--and yet I will function, you see.
"When you made your speech to the Decennial Convention, I realized at once that in psychohistory there was a tool that might make it possible to identify what was good and bad for humanity. With it, the decisions we would make would be less blind. I would even trust to human beings to make those decisions and again reserve myself only for the greatest emergencies. So I arranged quickly to have Cleon learn of your speech and call you in. Then, when I heard your denial of the worth of psychohistory, I was forced to think of some way to make you try anyway. Do you understand, Hari?"
More than a little daunted, Seldon said, "I understand, Hummin."
"To you, I must remain Hummin on those rare occasions when I will be able to see you. I will give you what information I have if it is something you need and in my persona as Demerzel I will protect you as much as I can. As Daneel, you must never speak of me."
"I wouldnt want to," said Seldon hurriedly. "Since I need your help, it would ruin matters to have your plans impeded."
"Yes, I know you wouldnt want to." Daneel smiled wearily. "After all, you are vain enough to want full credit for psychohistory. You would not want anyone to know--ever--that you needed the help of a robot."
Seldon flushed. "I am not--"
"But you are, even if you carefully hide it from yourself. And it is important, for I am strengthening that emotion within you minimally so that you will never be able to speak of me to others. It will not even occur to you that you might do so."
Seldon said, "I suspect Dors knows--"
"She knows of me. And she too cannot speak of me to others. Now that you both know of my nature, you can speak of me to each other freely, but not to anyone else."
Daneel rose.--Hari, I have my work to do now. Before long, you and Dors will be taken back to the Imperial Sector--"
"The boy Raych must come with me. I cannot abandon him. And there is a young Dahlite named Yugo Amaryl--"
"I understand. Raych will be taken too and you can do with any friend as you will. You will all be taken care of appropriately. And you will work on psychohistory. You will have a staff. You will have the necessary computers and reference material. I will interfere as little as possible and if there is resistance to your views that does not actually reach the point of endangering the mission, then you will have to deal with it yourself."
"Wait, Hummin," said Seldon urgently. "What if, despite all your help and all my endeavors, it turns out that psychohistory cannot be made into a practical device after all? What if I fail?"
Daneel rose. "In that case, I have a second plan in hand. One I have been working on a long time on a separate world in a separate way. It too is very difficult and to some ways even more radical than psychohistory. It may fail too, but there is a greater chance of success if two roads are open than if either one alone was.
"Take my advice, Hari! If the time comes when you are able to set up some device that may act to prevent the worst from happening see if you can think of two devices, so that if one fails, the other will carry on. The Empire must be steadied or rebuilt on a new foundation. Let there be two such, rather than one, if that is possible."
He rose, "Now I must return to my ordinary work and you must turn to yours. You will be taken care of."
With one final nod, he rose and left.
Seldon looked after him and said softly, "First I must speak to Dors."

第九十三章
　　Ｒ•丹尼尔•奥利瓦的口气仍然平静沉稳，但在谢顿的感觉中，他的声音似乎有了微妙的变化，仿佛一旦不用扮演什么角色，他开口就更容易了。
“两万年以来，”丹尼尔说，“只要我不打算让别人知道，从来没有人能猜到我是个机器人。原因之一，是因为人类早已舍弃机器人，甚至很少有人记得它们曾经存在。此外，也因为我的确具有侦测和影响人类情感的能力。其中侦测没有什么问题，但对我而言，影响情感却是件困难的事，这和我的机器人本质有关。不过当我希望那样做的时候，我还是能做到。我拥有那种能力，并得和持反对立场的心意交战。我试着绝不轻易干预——除非在我毫无选择的情况下；当我必须插手干预时，也几乎只是增强既有的情感。而且尽可能越少越好。假如甚至连这一点都不需要，也能达到我的目的，我就会避免那样做。
“要让日主十四接纳你们，并无必要对他进行干涉——我管它叫‘干涉’，你该注意到了，因为那不是一件愉快的事。我不必干涉他，因为他的确欠我的情，而他是个荣誉至上的人。尽管你发现他有许多怪癖。当你犯了他眼中的亵渎罪时，我的确出手干预了，但程度相当小。他不急于将你们交给帝国当局，他不喜欢那些人。我只是将这种厌恶稍微加强，他便将你们交由我看管，并接受我提出的说法。换成另一种情况，他可能会将那些话当做似是而非的言论。
“我也未曾对你进行多么显著的干涉。你同样不信任帝国当局，如今大多数人都一样，这是帝国衰败和倾颓的一个重要因素。非但如此，你还对心理史学这个概念引以为自豪——因为自己能想到它而感到骄傲。你不介意去证明它是个实用的学科，这样做会让你感到更加骄傲。”
谢顿皱了皱眉头，说道：“对不起，机器人阁下，我不晓得自己是个如此骄傲的怪兽。”
丹尼尔温和地说：“你绝不是骄傲的怪兽。你完全了解被骄傲驱动不值得恭维也毫无用处，所以你努力抑制那种驱动力；但你同样大可否认心跳是你的动力源，这两者都是你无法做主的。虽然你为了内心的平静，将你的骄傲藏在自己找不到的地方，你却无法对我隐藏。它就在那里，不论你遮掩得多么仔细。我只要稍微将它加强一点，你就立刻愿意采取躲避丹莫茨尔的行动，而在前一刻，你还会抗拒那些行动。你也随即渴望集中全力发展心理史学，而在前一刻，你还对它嗤之以鼻。
“我认为没有必要碰触其他情感，所以才让你推出了你的机器人论。假使我预见这个可能性，我或许会阻止，但我的先见之明和我的能力并非无限。我也不会对如今的失败感到后悔，因为你的论点都很有道理。让你知道我是谁，以及让我以本来面目帮助你，都是非常重要的事。情感，亲爱的谢顿，是人类行动的一个强大动力，远比人类自已所了解的更为强大。你无法明白轻轻一碰能达到多大效果，以及我多不情愿这样做。”
谢顿的呼吸变得沉重，他试着将自己视为一个被骄傲驱动的人，而他不喜欢这种感觉：“为何不情愿？”
“因为很容易会做过头。早先，我必须阻止芮喜尔将帝国转变成封建式的无政府状态。我可以迅速扭转人心，但结果很可能是一场血腥的叛乱。男人毕竟就是男人——而卫荷的将领大多数是男人，想在任何男人心中挑起对女性的仇恨和潜在的恐惧，其实不必花太大工夫。这也许是个生物学的问题，我，身为一个机器人，无法全然了解。
“我需要做的只是增强那种感觉，好让她的计划自行崩溃。即使我做得仅仅多出一厘米，我也会失去我想要的——一次不流血的接收。我要的只是让他们在我的战士来到时不要抵抗，如此而已。”
丹尼尔顿了一下，仿佛在斟酌他的遣词用字，然后又说：“我不希望讨论和我的正电子脑相关的数学，它在我的理解之外，不过假使你花上足够心思，它也许并未超过你的能力范围。无论如何，我还是受到‘机器人三大法则’的支配。传统上它们以文字表述——或是很久以前曾经如此。它们的内容是：
一、机器人不得伤害人类，也不得因为不采取行动而使人类受到伤害。
二、除非违背第一法则，否则机器人必须服从人类的命令。
三、在不违背第一法则及第二法则的情况下，机器人必须保护自身的存在。
不过，两万年前我有一个……一个朋友，另一个机器人。他和我不同，不会被误认为人类。但拥有精神力量的是他，而且是经由他，我才获得了自己的精神力量。
在他的感觉中，似乎应该有个比三大法则更具一般性的规定。他称之为第○法则，因为○在一前面。它的内容是：
机器人不得伤害人类整体，也不得因为不采取行动而使人类整体受到伤害。
然后，第一法则必须变成：
一、除非违背第○法则，机器人不得伤害人类，也不得因为不采取行动而使人类受到伤害。
其他两个法则也必须做类似修正。你明白吗？”
丹尼尔满怀期待地停下来，谢顿接口道：“我明白。”
丹尼尔继续说：“问题是，哈里，一个人容易指认，我可以随手指出来。我们不难看出什么会、什么不会伤害一个人——至少，相对而言并不困难。但什么是人类整体呢？在我们提到人类整体时，我们指的是什么？我们怎样才能定义对人类整体的伤害？一个行动方针如何才会对人类裢体有益无害，我们又如何分辨？首先提出第○法则的那个机器人死了——变得永远停摆，因为他被迫进行一项他感到会拯救人类整体的行动，却又无法确定它会拯救人类整体。当他停摆之际，他将照顾银河的责任留给了我。
“从那时候开始，我一直努力尝试。我尽可能做最小的干预，仅靠人类自己判断什么是好的。他们可以赌，我却不能；他们可以失误，我却不敢；他们可以无意间造成伤害，若是我则会停摆。第○法则不允许任何失误。
“但有时我还是被迫采取行动。我依旧运作如常的这个事实，显示我的行动始终适度和谨慎。然而，在帝国开始没落衰微之后，我不得不干预得较为频繁；而过去数十年间，我不得不扮演丹莫茨尔这个角色，试着经营这个政府，帮它逃过覆亡的命运——但我运作如常，你看到了。
“你在十年会议上发表演说后，我立刻了解心理史学中藏有一个工具，或许能辨认出什么行动对人类整体有益或有害。在它的帮助下，我们不会再那么盲目地下决定。我甚至能放手让人类自行做出决定，只须在最紧急的危机时刻才介入。因此我很快做出安排，让克里昂知晓你的演说并召见你。然后，当我听到你否认心理史学的价值时，我被迫想出另一个办法，好歹要让你继续尝试。你明白吗，哈里？”
谢顿感到兹事体大，不觉有些惶恐：“我明白，夫铭。”
“今后对你而言，在我能见到你的少数机会中，我的身份将仍是夫铭。我会给你我所有的一切数据，只要那是你需要的。而在我的丹莫茨尔身份之下，我会尽我的一切力量保护你。至于丹尼尔这个身份，你以后绝对不能提起。”
“我不会那样做，”谢顿连忙说道，“因为我需要你的帮助，让你的计划受阻会坏了我的大事。”
“没错，我知道你不会那样做。”丹尼尔露出疲倦的微笑，“毕竟你十分自负，想要占有心理史学的全部功劳。你不会想——绝不会想让任何人知道，你曾经需要一个机器人的帮助。”
谢顿涨红了脸：“我不是……”
“但你的确是——即使你将它仔细隐藏起来，不让自己看见。这点相当重要，因为我正在将你的这种情感稍稍推强，使你绝不会对别人提到我。你甚至不会有想说出来的念头。”
谢顿说：“我想铎丝知道……”
“她知道我的身份，她同样不能对别人提到我。既然你们两人都已知道我的真面目，你们相互间可以随意提起我，但不可以对别人说。”
丹尼尔提高音量说：“哈里，我现在要忙别的工作。不久之后，你和铎丝会被带回皇区……”
“芮奇那孩子一定要跟我走，我不能遗弃他。此外还有个名叫雨果•阿马瑞尔的年轻达尔人……”
“我明白。芮奇也会被带回去，你还可以带着你喜欢的任何朋友，你们都会得到适当的照顾。你将投入心理史学的研究，你会有一组人，会有必需的计算机和参考资料。我将尽可能不加干预，假如你的计划受到阻碍，却未真正达到危及这项任务的程度，那么你得自行设法解决。”
“慢着，夫铭，”谢顿急切地说，“如果说，虽然有你的鼎力相助，以及我的全力以赴，心理史学终究无法成为一个实用的机制呢？我要是失败了怎么办？”
丹尼尔再度提高音量：“这样的话，我手中还有第二套计划。我已经在另一个世界，以另一个方法进行了很久。它同样非常困难，就某些方面而言，甚至比心理史学更为激进。它也可能失败，但我们面前若有两条路，总会比单独一条带有更大的成功机会。
“接受我的忠告，哈里！假如有朝一日，你真能建立起某种机制，有可能借以防止最坏的情况发生，看看你是否能想出两套机制，如此则万一其中之一失败，另外一个仍能继续。帝国必须稳定下来，或是重建在一个新的基础上。建立两个这样的基础吧，不要只有一个——假如可能的话。”
他再度提高音量：“现在我必须返回我的普通角色，而你必须回到你的工作岗位。你会被照顾得很好。”
他最后一次点点头，随即起身离去。
谢顿望着他的背影，喃喃说道：“我得先找铎丝谈谈。”
Chapter 94

Dors said, "The palace is cleared. Rashelle will not be physically harmed. And youll return to the Imperial Sector, Hari."
"And you, Dors?" said Seldon in a low tight voice.
"I presume I will go back to the University," she said. "My work is being neglected, my classes abandoned.""No, Dors, you have a greater task."
"What is that?"
"Psychohistory. I cannot tackle the project without you."
"Of course you can. I am a total illiterate in mathematics."
"And I in history--and we need both."
Dors laughed. "I suspect that, as a mathematician, you are one of a kind. I, as a historian, am merely adequate, certainly not outstanding. You will find any number of historians who will suit the needs of psychohistory better than I do."
"In that case, Dors, let me explain that psychohistory needs more than a mathematician and a historian. It also needs the will to tackle what will probably be a lifetime problem. Without you, Dors, I will not have that will."
"Of course youll have it."
"Dors, if youre not with me, I dont intend to have it."
Dors looked at Seldon thoughtfully. "This is a fruitless discussion, Hari. Undoubtedly, Hummin will make the decision. If he sends me back to the University."
"He wont."
"How can you be sure?"
"Because Ill put it to him plainly. If he sends you back to the University, Ill go back to Helicon and the Empire can go ahead and destroy itself."
"You cant mean it."
"But I certainly do."
"Dont you realize that Hummin can arrange to have your feelings change so that you will work on psychohistory--even without me?"
Seldon shook his head. "Hummin will not make such an arbitrary decision. Ive spoken to him. He dares not do much to the human mind because he is bound by what he calls the Laws of Robotics. To change my mind to the point where I will not want you with me, Dors, would mean a change of the kind he can not risk. On the other hand, if he leaves me alone and if you join me in the project, he will have what he wants--a true chance at psychohistory. Why should he not settle for that?"
Dors shook her head. "He may not agree for reasons of his own."
"Why should he disagree? You were asked to protect me, Dors. Has Hummin canceled that request?"
"No."
"Then he wants you to continue your protection. And I want your protection."
"Against what? You now have Hummins protection, both as Demerzel and as Daneel, and surely that is all you need."
"If I had the protection of every person and every force in the Galaxy, it would still be yours I would want."
"Then you dont want me for psychohistory. You want me for protection."
Seldon scowled. "No! Why are you twisting my words? Why are you forcing me to say what you must know? It is neither psychohistory nor protection I want you for. Those are excuses and Ill use any other I need. I want you--just you. And if you want the real reason, it is because you are you."
"You dont even know me."
"That doesnt matter. I dont care.--And yet I do know you in a way. Better than you think."
"Do you indeed?"
"Of course. You follow orders and you risk your life without hesitation and with no apparent care for the consequences. You learned how to play tennis so quickly. You learned how to use knives even more quickly and you handled yourself perfectly in the fight with Marron. Inhumanly--if I may say so. Your muscles are amazingly strong and your reaction time is amazingly fast. You can somehow tell when a room is being eavesdropped and you can be in touch with Hummin in some way that does not involve instrumentation."
Dors said, "And what do you think of all that?"
"It has occurred to me that Hummin, in his persona as R. Daneel Olivaw, has an impossible task. How can one robot try to guide the Empire? He must have helpers."
"That is obvious. Millions, I should imagine. I am a helper. You are a helper. Little Raych is a helper."
"You are a different kind of helper."
"In what way? Hari, say it. If you hear yourself say it, you will realize how crazy it is."
Seldon looked long at her and then said in a low voice, "I will not say it because ... I dont care."
"You really dont? You wish to take me as I am?"
"I will take you as I must. You are Dors and, whatever else you are, in all the world I want nothing else."
Dors said softly, "Hari, I want what is good for you because of what I am, but I feel that if I wasnt what I am, I would still want what is good for you. And I dont think I am good for you."
"Good for me or bad, I dont care." Here Hari looked down as he paced a few steps, weighing what he would say next. "Dors, have you ever been kissed?"
"Of course, Hari. Its a social part of life and I live socially."
"No, no! I mean, have you ever really kissed a man? You know, passionately?"
"Well yes, Hari, I have."
"Did you enjoy it?"
Dors hesitated. She said, "When Ive kissed in that way, I enjoyed it more than I would have enjoyed disappointing a young man I liked, someone whose friendship meant something to me." At this point, Dors blushed and she turned her face away. "Please, Hari, this is difficult for me to explain."
But Hari, more determined now than ever, pressed further. "So you kissed for the wrong reasons, then, to avoid hurt feelings."
"Perhaps everyone does, in a sense."
Seldon mulled this over, then said suddenly, "Did you ever ask to be kissed?"
Dors paused, as though looking back on her life. "No."
"Or wish to be kissed again, once you had?"
"No."
"Have you ever slept with a man?" he asked softly, desperately.
"Of course. I told you. These things are a part of life."
Hari gripped her shoulders as if he was going to shake her. "But have you ever felt the desire, a need for that kind of closeness with just one special person? Dors, have you ever felt love."
Dors looked up slowly, almost sadly, and locked eyes with Seldon. "Im sorry, Hari, but no."
Seldon released her, letting his arms fall dejectedly to his sides. Then Dors placed her hand gently on his arm and said, "So you see, Hari. Im not really what you want."
Seldons head drooped and he stared at the floor. He weighed the matter and tried to think rationally. Then he gave up. He wanted what he wanted and he wanted it beyond thought and beyond rationality. He looked up.
"Dors, dear, even so, I dont care." Seldon put his arms around her and brought his head close to hers slowly, as though waiting for her to pull away, all the while drawing her nearer.
Dors made no move and he kissed her--slowly, lingeringly, and then passionately--and her arms suddenly tightened around him. When he stopped at last, she looked at him with eyes that mirrored her smile and she said:
"Kiss me again, Hari. Please."

The End
第九十四章
　　铎丝说：“官邸已经彻底扫荡，芮喜尔不会受到实质伤害。而你将回到皇区去。哈里。”
“你呢，铎丝？”谢顿以低沉而紧张的声音说。
“我想我会回大学去。”她说，“我的工作荒置了，我教的课也没人管。”
“不，铎丝，你有更重大的工作。”
“什么工作？”
“心理史学，没有你，我无法进行这个计划。”
“你当然可以，我对数学完全是文盲。”
“而我对历史也是——我们同时需要这两者。”
铎丝哈哈大笑：“在我看来，身为数学家，你举世无双。而我这个历史学家，只不过刚好及格，绝对不算杰出。比我更适合心理史学需要的历史学家，你要多少就能找到多少。”
“如果你这样认为的话．铎丝，让我解释一下。心理史学需要的不只是一个数学家和一个历史学家，它还需要一种意志，来勇敢面对这个可能要钻研一辈子的问题。铎丝，没有你，我不会有那种意志。”
“你当然会有。”
“铎丝，如果你不跟我在一起，我不打算要有那种意志。”
铎丝若有所思地望着谢顿：“这是个不会有结果的讨论，哈里。毋庸置疑，夫铭将做出决定。假如他决定送我回大学……”
“他不会的。”
“你怎能肯定？”
“因为我会跟他说明白，如果他送你回大学，我就要回到赫利肯，帝国大可以继续走向自我毁灭的终点。”
“你不可能是说真的。”
“但我说的确实是真的。”
“难道你不了解，夫铭可以使你的情感产生变化，这样你就会愿意研究心理史学——即使没有我？”
谢顿摇了摇头：“夫铭不会那么武断。我跟他谈过，他不敢对人类心灵做太多手脚，因为他受到他所谓机器人法则的束缚。而改变我的心灵，使我不再想要跟你在一起，正是他无法冒险从事的那种改变。话说回来．如果他不干涉我，如果你加入我的计划，他会得到他所要的——心理史学成功的真正机会。他为什么不该满意呢？”
铎丝摇了摇头：“也许由于某些他自己的理由，他会不同意这样做。”
“他为什么要不同意？你受他之托来保护我，这个托付被取消了吗？”
“没有。”
“那么他就是要你继续保护我，而我也需要要你的保护。”
“保护什么呢？你现在已有夫铭的保护——同时以丹莫茨尔和丹尼尔的身份。对你当然足够了。”
“即使我拥有银河中每一个人、每一份力量，我仍只要你的保护。”
“那么你要我不是为了心理史学，你要我是为了保护你。”
谢顿面露不悦之色：“不！为什么你一直曲解我的话？为什么你要逼我说出你一定明白的事？我要你既不是为了心理史学，也不是为了保护我。那些都只是借口，必要的话，我还会用到其他任何借口。我要的是你——只是你。如果你要真正的理由，那是因为你就是你。”
“你甚至不了解我。”
“那不重要，我不在乎——但就某方面而言，我的确可说了解你，比你想象中还了解的多。”
“真的吗？”
“当然。你是那么听命行事，你为我甘冒生命危险，从来不曾迟疑，看来好像不顾一切后果。你学习网球的速度那么快，你学习使用双刀甚至更快，而在和玛隆的激战中，你表现得完美无缺。简直不像个人——如果我能这么说。你的肌肉结实得出奇，你的瞬间反应快得惊人。当一个房间遭到窃听，你就是有办法看出来。而且你能以某种方式跟夫铭保持联络，根本不必使用任何仪器。”
铎丝说：“从这些你推出来什么结论？”
“这使我想到，夫铭在他的机•丹尼尔•奥利瓦身份之下，进行着一件不可能的任务。一个机器人怎么可能照管整个帝国？他一定有些帮手。”
“那是显然的事。可能有好几百万，我这么猜想。我是个帮手，你是个帮手，小芮奇也是个帮手。”
“你是个不一样的帮手。”
“哪里不一样？哈里，说出来。假如你听到自己说出的话，你将了解它有多么疯狂。”
谢顿对她凝视良久，然后低声说道：“我不会说出来，因为……我不存乎。”
“真的不在乎？你愿意接受真正的我？”
“我会接受我必须接受的你。不论你是什么，你还是铎丝，在这个世上我别无所求。”
铎丝柔声说道：“哈里，因为我是铎丝，所以我要你得到最好的；但即使我不是铎丝，我仍会希望你得到最好的。而我不认为自己对你有什么好。”
“对我是好是坏，我并不在乎。”说到这里，谢顿踱了几步，低下头来，揣度着即将说出口的话。“铎丝，你曾被吻过吗？”
“当然，哈里。那是社会生活的一部分，而我活在社会中。”
“不，不！我的意思是说，你真正吻过一个男人吗？你知道——热情地！”
“嗯，有的。哈里，我做过。”
“你喜欢吗？”
铎丝犹豫了一下：“当我那样吻的时候，我喜欢它的原因，是因为我更不喜欢让一个我喜爱的、他的友谊对我有些意义的年轻男子失望。”说到这里，铎丝的双颊绯红，赶紧将脸别过去。“拜托，哈里，要我解释这种事并不容易。”
但此刻的谢顿比以往任何时候更为坚决，他毫不放松地继续逼近：“所以说，你是为了错误的理由，为了避免伤害某人的感情而吻。”
“也许每个人都是这样，就某种意义而言，”
谢顿将这句话咀嚼了一番，又突然说：“你曾经要求别人吻你吗？”
铎丝顿了一下，仿佛在回顾她的一生：“没有。”
“或者希望再被吻一次，在你被吻过之后？”
“没有。”
“你曾经跟男人睡过觉吗？”他绝望地轻声问道。
“当然有，我告诉过你，这些事情是生活的一部分。”
谢顿紧紧抓住她的双肩，似乎是要摇晃她：“但你曾经感到那种欲望吗，只和一个特别的人有那种亲密关系的需要？铎丝，你曾经感受过爱吗？”
铎丝缓缓地，几乎伤感地抬起头来，目光与谢顿的锁在一起。“我很抱歉，哈里，我没有。”
谢顿放开她，让自己的双臂颓然垂到身子两侧。
接着，铎丝将一只手轻柔地放到他的肩上。“所以你看，哈里，我不是你真正想要的。”
谢顿垂下头来，双眼瞪着地板。他衡量着这一切，试着理性地思考。然后，他放弃了，他只要他想要的，而他的向往超越了思考与理件。
他抬起头来：“铎丝，亲爱的，即使如此，我还是不在乎。”
谢顿用双臂搂住她，缓缓将头凑过去，仿佛等着她随时抽身，但却将她越搂越紧。
铎丝没有任何动作，于是他吻了她——先是慢慢地、流连地，接着是热情地。她的双臂突然紧紧环抱住他。
等到他终于停下来，她凝望着他，双眼中映着笑意。
她说：“再吻我一次，哈里——拜托。”
