
Chapter 66

When Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili were alone, Dors asked thoughtfully, "Are you really planning to see this Mother woman?"
"Im thinking about it, Dors."
"Youre an odd one, Hari. You seem to go steadily from bad to worse. You went Upperside, which seemed harmless enough, for a rational purpose when you were in Streeling. Then, in Mycogen, you broke into the Elders aerie, a much more dangerous task, for a much more foolish purpose. And now in Dahl, you want to go to this place, which that young man seems to think is simple suicide, for something altogether nonsensical."
"Im curious about this reference to Earth--and must know if theres anything to it."
Dors said, "Its a legend and not even an interesting one. It is routine. The names differ from planet to planet, but the content is the same. There is always the tale of an original world and a golden age. There is a longing for a supposedly simple and virtuous past that is almost universal among the people of a complex and vicious society. In one way or another, this is true of all societies, since everyone imagines his or her own society to be too complex and vicious, however simple it may be. Mark that down for your psychohistory."
"Just the same," said Seldon, "I have to consider the possibility that one world did once exist. Aurora ... Earth ... the name doesnt matter. In fact--"
He paused and finally Dors said, "Well?"
Seldon shook his head. "Do you remember the hand-on-thigh story you told me in Mycogen? It was right after I got the Book from Raindrop Forty-Three ... Well, it popped into my head one evening recently when we were talking to the Tisalvers. I said something that reminded me, for an instant--"
"Reminded you of what?"
"I dont remember. It came into my head and went out again, but somehow every time I think of the single-world notion, it seems to me I have the tips of my fingers on something and then lose it."
Dors looked at Seldon in surprise. "I dont see what it could be. The hand-on-thigh story has nothing to do with Earth or Aurora."
"I know, but this ... thing ... that hovers just past the edge of my mind seems to be connected with this single world anyway and I have the feeling that I must find out more about it at any cost. That ... and robots."
"Robots too? I thought the Elders aerie put an end to that."
"Not at all. Ive been thinking about them." He stared at Dors with a troubled look on his face for a long moment, then said, "But Im not sure."
"Sure about what, Hari?"
But Seldon merely shook his head and said nothing more.
Dors frowned, then said, "Hari, let me tell you one thing. In sober history--and, believe me, I know what Im talking about there is no mention of one world of origin. Its a popular belief, I admit. I dont mean just among the unsophisticated followers of folklore, like the Mycogenians and the Dahlite heatsinkers, but there are biologists who insist that there must have been one world of origin for reasons that are well outside my area of expertise and there are the more mystical historians who tend to speculate about it. And among the leisure-class intellectuals, I understand such speculations are becoming fashionable. Still, scholarly history knows nothing about it."
Seldon said, "All the more reason, perhaps, to go beyond scholarly history. All I want is a device that will simplify psychohistory for me and I dont care what the device is, whether it is a mathematical trick or a historical trick or something totally imaginary. If the young man weve just talked to had had a little more formal training, Id have set him on the problem. His thinking is marked by considerable ingenuity and originality--"
Dors said, "And youre really going to help him, then?"
"Absolutely. Just as soon as Im in a position to."
"But ought you to make promises youre not sure youll be able to keep?"
"I want to keep it. If youre that stiff about impossible promises, consider that Hummin told Sunmaster Fourteen that Id use psychohistory to get the Mycogenians their world back. Theres just about zero chance of that. Even if I work out psychohistory, who knows if it can be used for so narrow and specialized a purpose? Theres a real case of promising what one cant deliver."
But Dors said with some heat, "Chetter Hummin was trying to save our lives, to keep us out of the hands of Demerzel and the Emperor. Dont forget that. And I think he really would like to help the Mycogenians."
"And I really would like to help Yugo Amaryl and I am far more likely to be able to help him than I am the Mycogenians, so if you justify the second, please dont criticize the first. Whats more, Dors"--and his eyes flashed angrily--"I really would like to find Mother Rittah and Im prepared to go alone.""Never!" snapped Dors. "If you go, I go."

Chapter 67

Mistress Tisalver returned with her daughter in tow an hour after Amaryl had left on this way to his shift. She said nothing at all to either Seldon or Dors, but gave a curt nod of her head when they greeted her and gazed sharply about the room as though to verify that the heatsinker had left no trace. She then sniffed the air sharply and looked at Seldon accusingly before marching through the common room into the family bedroom.
Tisalver himself arrived home later and when Seldon and Dors came to the dinner table, Tisalver took advantage of the fact that his wife was still ordering some last-minute details in connection with the dinner to say in a low voice, "Has that person been here?"
"And gone," said Seldon solemnly. "Your wife was out at the time."
Tisalver nodded and said, "Will you have to do this again?"
"I dont think so," said Seldon.
"Good."
Dinner passed largely in silence, but afterward, when the daughter had gone to her room for the dubious pleasures of computer practice, Seldon leaned back and said, "Tell me about Billibotton."
Tisalver looked astonished and his mouth moved without any sound issuing.
Casilia, however, was less easily rendered speechless. She said, "Is that where your new friend lives? Are you going to return the visit?"
"So far," said Seldon quietly, "I have just asked about Billibotton."
Casilia said sharply, "It is a slum. The dregs live there. No one goes there, except the filth that make their homes there."
"I understand a Mother Rittah lives there."
"I never heard of her," said Casilia, her mouth closing with a snap. It was quite clear that she had no intention of knowing anyone by name who lived in Billibotton.
Tisalver, casting an uneasy look at his wife, said, "Ive heard of her. Shes a crazy old woman who is supposed to tell fortunes."
"And does she live in Billibotton?"
"I dont know, Master Seldon. Ive never seen her. Shes mentioned sometimes in the news holocasts when she makes her predictions."
"Do they come true?"
Tisalver snorted. "Do predictions ever come true? Hers dont even make sense."
"Does she ever talk about Earth?"
"I dont know. I wouldnt be surprised."
"The mention of Earth doesnt puzzle you. Do you know about Earth?"
Now Tisalver looked surprised. "Certainly, Master Seldon. Its the world all people came from ... supposedly."
"Supposedly? Dont you believe it?"
"Me? Im educated. But many ignorant people believe it."
"Are there book-films about Earth?"
"Childrens stories sometimes mention Earth. I remember, when I was a young boy, my favorite story began, Once, long ago, on Earth, when Earth was the only planet-- Remember, Casilia? You liked it too."
Casilia shrugged, unwilling to bend as yet.
"Id like to see it sometime," said Seldon, "but I mean real book-films ... uh ... learned ones ... or films ... or printouts."
"I never heard of any, but the library--"
"Ill try that.--Are there any taboos about speaking of Earth?"
"What are taboos?"
"I mean, is it a strong custom that people mustnt talk of Earth or that outsiders mustnt ask about it?"
Tisalver looked so honestly astonished that there seemed no point in waiting for an answer.
Dors put in, "Is there some rule about outsiders not going to Billibotton?"
Now Tisalver turned earnest. "No rule, but its not a good idea for anyone to go there. I wouldnt."
Dors said, "Why not?"
"Its dangerous. Violent! Everyone is armed.--I mean, Dahl is an armed place anyway, but in Billibotton they use the weapons. Stay in this neighborhood. Its safe."
"So far," said Casilia darkly. "It would be better if we left altogether. Heatsinkers go anywhere these days." And there was another lowering look in Seldons direction.
Seldon said, "What do you mean that Dahl is an armed place? There are strong Imperial regulations against weapons."
"I know that," said Tisalver, "and there are no stun guns here or percussives or Psychic Probes or anything like that. But there are knives." He looked embarrassed.
Dors said, "Do you carry a knife, Tisalver?"
"Me?" He looked genuinely horrified. "I am a man of peace and this is a safe neighborhood."
"We have a couple of them in the house," said Casilia, sniffing again. "Were not that certain this is a safe neighborhood."
"Does everyone carry knives?" asked Dors.
"Almost everyone, Mistress Venabili," said Tisalver. "Its customary. But that doesnt mean everyone uses them."
"But they use them in Billibotton, I suppose," said Dors.
"Sometimes. When theyre excited, they have fights."
"And the government permits it? The Imperial government, I mean?"
"Sometimes they try to clean Billibotton up, but knives are too easy to hide and the custom is too strong. Besides, its almost always Dahlites that get killed and I dont think the Imperial government gets too upset over that."
"What if its an outsider who gets killed?"
"If its reported, the Imperials could get excited. But what happens is that no one has seen anything and no one knows anything. The Imperials sometimes round up people on general principles, but they can never prove anything. I suppose they decide its the outsiders fault for being there.--So dont go to Billibotton, even if you have a knife."
Seldon shook his head rather pettishly. "I wouldnt carry a knife. I dont know how to use one. Not skillfully."
"Then its simple, Master Seldon. Stay out." Tisalver shook his head portentously. "Just stay out."
"I may not be able to do that either," said Seldon.
Dors glared at him, clearly annoyed, and said to Tisalver, "Where does one buy a knife? Or may we have one of yours?"
Casilia said quickly, "No one takes someone elses knife. You must buy your own."
Tisalver said, "There are knife stores all over. There arent supposed to be. Theoretically theyre illegal, you know. Any appliance store sells them, however. If you see a washing machine on display, thats a sure sign."
"And how does one get to Billibotton?" asked Seldon.
"By Expressway."
Tisalver looked dubious as he looked at Dorss frowning expression.
Seldon said, "And once I reach the Expressway?"
"Get on the eastbound side and watch for the signs. But if you must go, Master Seldon"--Tisalver hesitated, then said--"you mustnt take Mistress Venabili. Women sometimes are treated ... worse."
"She wont go," said Seldon.
"Im afraid she will," said Dors with quiet determination.



Chapter 68

The appliance store dealers mustache was clearly as lush as it had been in his younger days, but it was grizzled now, even though the hair on his head was still black. He touched the mustache out of sheer habit as he gazed at Dors and brushed it back on each side.
He said, "Youre not a Dahlite."
"Yes, but I still want a knife."
He said, "Its against the law to sell knives."
Dors said, "Im not a policewoman or a government agent of any sort. Im going to Billibotton."
He stared at her thoughtfully. "Alone?"
"With my friend." She jerked her thumb over her shoulder in the direction of Seldon, who was waiting outside sullenly.
"Youre buying it for him?" He stared at Seldon and it didnt take him long to decide. "Hes an outsider too. Let him come in and buy it for himself."
"Hes not a government agent either. And Im buying it for myself."
The dealer shook his head. "Outsiders are crazy. But if you want to spend some credits, Ill take them from you."
He reached under the counter, brought out a stub, turned it with a slight and expert motion, and the knife blade emerged.
"Is that the largest you have?"
"Best womans knife made."
"Show me a mans knife."
"You dont want one thats too heavy. Do you know how to use one of these things?"
"Ill learn and Im not worried about heavy. Show me a mans knife."
The dealer smiled. "Well, if you want to see one--"
He moved farther down the counter and brought up a much fatter stub. He gave it a twist and what appeared to be a butchers knife emerged. He handed it to her, handle first, still smiling.
She said, "Show me that twist of yours."
He showed her on a second knife, slowly twisting one way to make the blade appear, then the other way to make it disappear. "Twist and squeeze," he said.
"Do it again, sir."
The dealer obliged.
Dors said, "All right, close it and toss me the haft."
He did, in a slow upward loop.
She caught it, handed it back, and said, "Faster."
He raised his eyebrows and then, without warning, backhanded it to her left side. She made no attempt to bring over her right hand, but caught it with her left and the blade showed tumescently at once--then disappeared. The dealers mouth fell open.
"And this is the largest you have?" she said.
"It is. If you try to use it, it will just tire you out."
"Ill breathe deeply. Ill take a second one too."
"For your friend?"
"No. For me."
"You plan on using two knives?"
"Ive got two hands."
The dealer sighed. "Mistress, please stay out of Billibotton. You dont know what they do to women there."
"I can guess. How do I put these knives on my belt?"
"Not the one youve got on, Mistress. Thats not a knife belt. I can sell you one, though."
"Will it hold two knives?"
"I might have a double belt somewhere. Not much call for them."
"Im calling for them."
"I may not have it in your size."
"Then well cut it down or something."
"It will cost you a lot of credits."
"My credit tile will cover it."
When she emerged at last, Seldon said sourly, "You look ridiculous with that bulky belt."
"Really, Hari? Too ridiculous to go with you to Billibotton? Then lets both go back to the apartment."
"No. Ill go on by myself. Ill be safer by myself."
Dors said, "There is no use saying that, Hari. We both go back or we both go forward. Under no circumstances do we separate."
And somehow the firm look in her blue eyes, the set to her lips, and the manner in which her hands had dropped to the hafts at her belt, convinced Seldon she was serious.
"Very well," he said, "but if you survive and if I ever see Hummin again, my price for continuing to work on psychohistory--much as I have grown fond of you--will be your removal. Do you understand?"
And suddenly Dors smiled. "Forget it. Dont practice your chivalry on me. Nothing will remove me. Do you understand?"

Chapter 69
They got off the Expressway where the sign, flickering in the air, said: BILLIBOTTON. As perhaps an indication of what might be expected, the second I was smeared, a mere blob of fainter light.
They made their way out of the car and down to the walkway below. It was early afternoon and at first glance, Billibotton seemed much like the part of Dahl they had left.
The air, however, had a pungent aroma and the walkway was littered with trash.
One could tell that auto-sweeps were not to be found in the neighborhood. And, although the walkway looked ordinary enough, the atmosphere was uncomfortable and as tense as a too-tightly coiled spring. Perhaps it was the people. There seemed the normal number of pedestrians, but they were not like pedestrians elsewhere, Seldon thought. Ordinarily, in the press of business, pedestrians were self-absorbed and in the endless crowds on the endless thoroughfares of Trantor, people could only survive--psychologically--by ignoring each other. Eyes slid away. Brains were closed off. There was an artificial privacy with each person enclosed in a velvet fog of his or her own making. Or there was the ritualistic friendliness of an evening promenade in those neighborhoods that indulged in such things. But here in Billibotton, there was neither friendliness nor neutral withdrawal. At least not where outsiders were concerned. Every person who passed, moving in either direction, turned to stare at Seldon and Dors. Every pair of eyes, as though attached by invisible cords to the two outsiders, followed them with ill will.
The clothing of the Billibottoners tended to be smudged, old, and sometimes corn. There was a patina of ill-washed poverty over them and Seldon felt uneasy at the slickness of his own new clothes.
He said, "Where in Billibotton does Mother Rittah live, do you suppose?"
"I dont know," said Dors. "You brought us here, so you do the supposing. I intend to confine myself to the task of protection and I think Im going to find it necessary to do just that."
Seldon said, "I assumed it would only be necessary to ask the way of any passerby, but somehow Im not encouraged to do so."
"I dont blame you. I dont think youll find anyone springing to your assistance."
"On the other hand, there are such things as youngsters." He indicated one with a brief gesture of one hand. A boy who looked to be about twelve--in any case young enough to lack the universal adult male mustache had come to a full halt and was staring at them.
Dors said, "Youre guessing that a boy that age has not yet developed the full Billibottonian dislike of outsiders."
"At any rate," said Seldon, "Im guessing he is scarcely large enough to have developed the full Billibottonian penchant for violence. I suppose he might run away and shout insults from a distance if we approach him, but I doubt hell attack us."
Seldon raised his voice. "Young man."
The boy took a step backward and continued to stare.
Seldon said, "Come here," and beckoned.
The boy said, "Wa for, guy?"
"So I can ask you directions. Come closer, so I dont have to shout."
The boy approached two steps closer. His face was smudged, but his eyes were bright and sharp. His sandals were of different make and there was a large patch on one leg of his trousers.
He said, "Wa kind o directions?"
"Were trying to find Mother Rittah."
The boys eyes flickered. "Wa for, guy?"
"Im a scholar. Do you know what a scholar is?"
"Ya went to school?"
"Yes. Didnt you?"
The boy spat to one side in contempt. "Nah."
"I want advice from Mother Rittah--if youll take me to her."
"Ya want your fortune? Ya come to Billibotton, guy, with your fancy clothes, so I can tell ya your fortune. All bad."
"Whats your name, young man?"
"Whats it to ya?"
"So we can speak in a more friendly fashion. And so you can take me to Mother Rittahs place. Do you know where she lives?"
"Maybe yes, maybe no. My names Raych. Whats in it for me if I take ya?"
"What would you like, Raych?"
The boys eyes halted at Dorss belt. Raych said, "The lady got a couple o knives. Gimme one and Ill take ya to Mother Rittah."
"Those are grown peoples knives, Raych. Youre too young."
"Then I guess Im too young to know where Mother Rittah lives." And he looked up slyly through the shaggy halt that curtained his eyes.
Seldon grew uneasy. It was possible they might attract a crowd. Several men had stopped already, but had then moved on when nothing of interest seemed to be taking place. If, however, the boy grew angry and lashed out at them in word or deed, people would undoubtedly gather.
He smiled and said, "Can you read, Raych?"
Raych spat again. "Nah! Who wants to read?"
"Can you use a computer?"
"A talking computer? Sure. Anyone can."
"Ill tell you what, then. You take me to the nearest computer store and Ill buy you a little computer all your own and software that will teach you to read. A few weeks and youll be able to read."
It seemed to Seldon that the boys eyes sparkled at the thought, but--if so--they hardened at once.
"Nah, Knife or nothin."
"Thats the point, Raych. You learn to read and dont tell anyone and you can surprise people. After a while you can bet them you can read. Bet them five credits. You can win a few extra credits that way and you can buy a knife of your own."
The boy hesitated. "Nah! No one will bet me. No one got credits."
"If you can read, you can get a job in a knife store and you can save your wages and get a knife at a discount. How about that?"
"When ya gonna buy the talking computer?"
"Right now. Ill give it to you when I see Mother Rittah."
"You got credits?"
"I have a credit tile."
"Lets see ya buy the computer."
The transaction was carried through, but when the boy reached for it, Seldon shook his head and put it inside his pouch. "Youve got to get me to Mother Rittah first, Raych. Are you sure you know where to find her?"
Raych allowed a look of contempt to cross his face. "Sure I do. Ill take ya there, only ya better hand over the computer when we get there or Ill get some guys I know after you and the lady, so ya better watch out."
"You dont have to threaten us," said Seldon. "Well take care of our end of the deal."
Raych led them quickly along the walkway, past curious stares. Seldon was silent during the walk and so was Dors. Dors was far less lost in her own thoughts, though, for she clearly remained conscious of the surrounding people at all times. She kept meeting, with a level glare, the eyes of those passersby that turned toward them. On occasion, when there were footsteps behind them, she turned to look grimly back.
And then Raych stopped and said, "In here. She aint homeless, ya know."
They followed him into an apartment complex and Seldon, who had had the intention of following their route with a view to retracing his steps later, was quickly lost.
He said, "How do you know your way through these alleys, Raych?"
The boy shrugged. "I been loafin through them since I was a kid," he said. "Besides, the apartments are numbered--where they aint broken off--and theres arrows and things. You cant get lost if you know the tricks."
Raych knew the tricks, apparently, and they wandered deeper into the complex. Hanging over it all was an air of total decay: disregarded debris, inhabitants slinking past in clear resentment of the outsiders invasion. Unruly youngsters ran along the alleys in pursuit of some game or other. Some of them yelled, "Hey, get out o the way!" when their levitating ball narrowly missed Dors. And finally, Raych stopped before a dark scarred door on which the number 2782 glowed feebly.
"This iiiit," he said and held out his hand.
"First lets see whos inside," said Seldon softly. He pushed the signal button and nothing happened.
"It dont work," said Raych. "Ya gotta bang. Loud. She dont hear too good."
Seldon pounded his fist on the door and was rewarded with the sound of movement inside. A shrill voice called out, "Who wants Mother Rittah?"
Seldon shouted, "Two scholars!"
He tossed the small computer, with its small package of software attached, to Raych, who snatchediit, grinned, and took off at a rapid run.
Seldon then turned to face the opening door and Mother Rittah.


Chapter 70

Mother Rittah was well into her seventies, perhaps, but had the kind of face that, at first sight, seemed to belie that. Plump cheeks, a little mouth, a small round chin slightly doubled. She was very short--not quite 1.5 meters tall--and had a thick body.
But there were fine wrinkles about her eyes and when she smiled, as she smiled at the sight of them, others broke out over her face. And she moved with difficulty.
"Come in, come in," she said in a soft high-pitchedivoice and peered at them as though her eyesight was beginning to fail. "Outsiders ... Outworlders even. Am I right? You dont seem to have the Trantor smell about you."
Seldon wished she hadnt mentioned smell. The apartment, overcrowded and littered with small possessions that seemed dim and dusty, reeked with food odors that were on the edge of rancidity. The air was so thick and clinging that he was sure his clothes would smell strongly of it when they left.
He said, "You are right, Mother Rittah. I am Hari Seldon of Helicon. My friend is Dors Venabili of Cinna."
"So," she said, looking about for an unoccupied spot on the floor where she could invite them to sit, but finding none suitable.
Dors said, "We are willing to stand, Mother."
"What?" she looked up at Dors. "You must speak briskly, my child. My hearing is not what it was when I was your age."
"Why dont you get a hearing device?" said Seldon, raising his voice.
"It wouldnt help, Master Seldon. Something seems to be wrong with the nerve and I have no money for nerve rebuilding.--You have come to learn the future from old Mother Rittah?"
"Not quite," said Seldon. "I have come to learn the past."
"Excellent. It is such a strain to decide what people want to hear."
"It must be quite an art," said Dors, smiling.
"It seems easy, but one has to he properly convincing. I earn my fees."
"If you have a credit outlet," said Seldon. "We will pay any reasonable fees if you tell us about Earth--without cleverly designing what you tell us to suit what we want to hear. We wish to hear the truth."
The old woman, who had been shuffling about the room, making adjustments here and there, as though to make it all prettier and more suitable for important visitors, stopped short. "What do you want to know about Earth?"
"What is it, to begin with?"
The old woman turned and seemed to gaze off into space. When she spoke, her voice was low and steady.
"It is a world, a very old planet. It is forgotten and lost."
Dors said, "It is not part of history. We know that much."
"It comes before history, child," said Mother Rittah solemnly. "It existed in the dawn of the Galaxy and before the dawn. It was the only world with humanity." She nodded firmly.
Seldon said, "Was another name for Earth ... Aurora?"
And now Mother Rittahs face misted into a frown. "Where did you hear that?"
"In my wanderings. I have heard of an old forgotten world named Aurora on which humanity lived in primordial peace."
"Its a lie." She wiped her mouth as though to get the taste of what she had just heard out of it. "That name you mention must never be mentioned except as the place of Evil. It was the beginning of Evil. Earth was alone till Evil came, along with its sister worlds. Evil nearly destroyed Earth, but Earth rallied and destroyed Evil--with the help of heroes."
"Earth was before this Evil. Are you sure of that?"
"Long before. Earth was alone in the Galaxy for thousands of years--millions of years."
"Millions of years? Humanity existed on it for millions of years with no other people on any other world?"
"Thats true. Thats true. Thats true."
"But how do you know all this? Is it all in a computer program? Or a printout? Do you have anything I can read?"
Mother Rittah shook her head. "I heard the old stories from my mother, who heard it from hers, and so on far back. I have no children, so I tell the stories to others, but it may come to an end. This is a time of disbelief."
Dors said, "Not really, Mother. There are people who speculate about prehistoric times and who study some of the tales of lost worlds."
Mother Rittah made a motion of her arm as though to wipe it away. "They look at it with cold eyes. Scholarly. They try to fit it in with their notions. I could tell you stories for a year of the great hero Ba-Lee, but you would have no time to listen and I have lost the strength to tell."
Seldon said, "Have you ever heard of robots?"
The old woman shuddered and her voice was almost a scream. "Why do you ask such things? Those were artificial human beings, evil in themselves and the work of the Evil worlds. They were destroyed and should never be mentioned."
"There was one special robot, wasnt there, that the Evil worlds hated?"
Mother Rittah tottered toward Seldon and peered into his eyes. He could feel her hot breath on his face. "Have you come to mock me? You know of these things and yet you ask? Why do you ask?"
"Because I wish to know."
"There was an artificial human being who helped Earth. He was Da-Nee, friend of Ba-Lee. He never died and lives somewhere, waiting for his time to return. None knows when that time will be, but someday he will come and restore the great old days and remove all cruelty, injustice, and misery. That is the promise."
At this, she closed her eyes and smiled, as if remembering ...
Seldon waited a while in silence, then sighed and said, "Thank you, Mother Rittah. You have been very helpful. What is your fee?"
"So pleasant to meet Outworlders," the old woman replied. "Ten credits. May I offer you some refreshment?"
"No, thank you," said Seldon earnestly. "Please take twenty. You need only tell us how to get back to the Expressway from here.--And, Mother Rittah, if you can arrange to have some of your tales of Earth put into a computer disc, I will pay you well."
"I would need so much strength. How well?"
"It would depend on how long the story is and how well it is told. I might pay a thousand credits."
Mother Rittah licked her lips. "A thousand credits? But how will I find you when the story is told?"
"I will give you the computer code number at which I can be reached."
After Seldon gave Mother Rittah the code number, he and Dors left, thankful for the comparatively clean odor of the alley outside. They walked briskly in the direction indicated by the old woman.

Chapter 71
Dors said, "That wasnt a very long interview, Hari."
"I know. The surroundings were terribly unpleasant and I felt I had learned enough. Amazing how these folktales tend to magnify."
"What do you mean, magnify?"
"Well, the Mycogenians fill their Aurora with human beings who lived for centuries and the Dahlites fill their Earth with a humanity that lived for millions of years. And both talk of a robot that lives forever. Still, it makes one think."
"As far as millions of years go, theres room for-- Where are we going?"
"Mother Rittah said we go in this direction till we reach a rest area, then follow the sign for CENTRAL WALKWAY, bearing left, and keep on following the sign. Did we pass a rest area on the way in?"
"We may be leaving by a route different from the one we came in. I dont remember a rest area, but I wasnt watching the route. I was keeping my eye on the people we passed and--"
Her voice died away. Up ahead the alley swelled outward on both sides. Seldon remembered. They had passed that way. There had been a couple of ratty couch pads resting on the walkway floor on either side. There was, however, no need for Dors to watch passersby going out as she had coming in. There were no passersby. But up ahead in the rest area they spotted a group of men, rather large-sized for Dahlites, mustaches bristling, bare upper arms muscular and glistening under the yellowish indoor light of the walkway. Clearly, they were waiting for the Outworlders and, almost automatically, Seldon and Dors came to a halt. For a moment or two, the tableau held. Then Seldon looked behind him hastily. Two or three additional men had stepped into view.
Seldon said between his teeth, "Were trapped. I should not have let you come, Dors."
"On the contrary. This is why Im here, but was it worth your seeing Mother Rittah?"
"If we get out of this, it was."
Seldon then said in a loud and firm voice, "May we pass?"
One of the men ahead stepped forward. He was fully Seldons height of 1.73 meters, but broader in the shoulders and much more muscular. A bit flabby at the waist, though, Seldon noted.
"Im Marron," he said with self-satisfied significance, as though the name ought to have meaning, "and Im here to tell you we dont like Outworlders in our district. You want to come in, all right--but if you want to leave, youll have to pay."
"Very well. How much?"
"All youve got. You rich Outworlders have credit tiles, right? Just hand them over."
"No."
"No point saying no. Well just take them."
"You cant take them without killing me or hurting me and they wont work without my voiceprint. My normal voiceprint."
"Thats not so, Master--see, Im being polite--we can take them away from you without hurting you very much."
"How many of you big strong men will it take? Nine? No." Seldon counted rapidly. "Ten."
"Just one. Me."
"With no help?"
"Just me."
"If the rest of you will clear away and give us room, I would like to see you try it, Marron."
"You dont have a knife, Master. You want one?"
"No, use yours to make the fight even. Ill fight without one."
Marron looked about at the others and said, "Hey, this puny guy is a sport. He dont even sound scared. Thats sort of nice. It would be a shame to hurt him. I tell you what, Master. Ill take the girl. If you want me to stop, hand over your credit tile and her tile and use your right voices to activate them. If you say no, then after Im through with the girl ... and thatll take some time"--he laughed--"Ill just have to hurt you."
"No," said Seldon. "Let the woman go. Ive challenged you to a fight--one to one, you with a knife, me without. If you want bigger odds, Ill fight two of you, but let the woman go."
"Stop, Hari!" cried out Dors. "If he wants me, let him come and get me. You stay right where you are, Hari, and dont move."
"You hear that?" said Marron, grinning broadly. " You stay right where you are, Hari, and dont move. I think the little lady wants me. You two, keep him still."
Each of Seldons arms were caught in an iron grip and he felt the sharp point of a knife in his back.
"Dont move," said a harsh whisper in his ear, "and you can watch. The lady will probably like it. Marrons pretty good at this."
Dors called out again. "Dont move, Hari!" She turned to face Marron watchfully, her half-closed hands poised near her belt.
He closed in on her purposefully and she waited till he had come within arms length, when suddenly her own arms flashed and Marron found himself facing two large knives.
For a moment, he leaned backward and then he laughed. "The little lady has two knives--knives like the big boys have. And Ive only got one. But thats fair enough." His knife was swiftly out. "I hate to have to cut you, little lady, because it will be more fun for both of us if I dont. Maybe I can just knock them out of your hands, huh?"
Dors said, "I dont want to kill you. Ill do all I can to avoid doing so. Just the same, I call on all to witness, that if I do kill you, it is to protect my friend, as I am honor-bound to do."
Marron pretended to be terrified. "Oh, please dont kill me, little lady." Then he burst into laughter and was joined by the other Dahlites present. Marron lunged with his knife, quite wide of the mark. He tried it again, then a third time, but Dors never budged. She made no attempt to fend off any motion that was not truly aimed at her.
Marrons expression darkened. He was trying to make her respond with panic, but he was only making himself seem ineffectual. The next lunge was directly at her and Dorss left-hand blade moved flashingly and caught his with a force that pushed his arm aside. Her right-hand blade flashed inward and made a diagonal slit in his T-shirt. A thin bloody line smeared the dark-haired skin beneath. Marron looked down at himself in shock as the onlookers gasped in surprise.
Seldon felt the grip on him weaken slightly as the two who held him were distracted by a duel not going quite as they had expected. He tensed himself.
Now Marron lunged again and this time his left hand shot outward to enclose Dorss right wrist. Again Dorss left-hand blade caught his knife and held it motionless, while her right hand twisted agilely and drew downward, even as Marrons left hand closed upon it. It closed on nothing but the blade and when he opened his hand there was a bloody line down the palm.
Dors sprang back and Marron, aware of the blood on his chest and hand, roared out chokingly, "Someone toss me another knife!" There was hesitation and then one of the onlookers tossed his own knife underhanded. Marron reached for it, but Dors was quicker. Her right-hand blade struck the thrown knife and sent it flying backward, whirling as it went.
Seldon felt the grips on his arms weaken further. He lifted them suddenly, pushing up and forward, and was free. His two captors turned toward him with a sudden shout, but he quickly kneed one in the groin and elbowed the other in the solar plexus and both went down.
He knelt to draw the knives of each and rose as double-armed as Dors. Unlike Dors, Seldon did not know how to handle the blades, but he knew the Dahlites would scarcely be aware of that.
Dors said, "Just keep them off, Hari. Dont attack yet.--Marron, my next stroke will not be a scratch."
Marron, totally enraged, roared incoherently and charged blindly, attempting by sheer kinetic energy to overwhelm his opponent. Dors, dipping and sidestepping, ducked under his right arm, kicked her foot against his right ankle, and down he crashed, his knife flying.
She then knelt, placed one blade against the back of his neck and the other against his throat, and said, "Yield!"
With another yell, Marron struck out against her with one arm, pushed her to one side, then scrambled to his feet.
He had not yet stood up completely when she was upon him, one knife slashing downward and hacking away a section of his mustache. This time he yowled like a large animal in agony, clapping his hand to his face. When he drew it away, it was dripping blood.
Dors shouted, "It wont grow again, Marron. Some of the lip went with it. Attack once more and youre dead meat."
She waited, but Marron had had enough. He stumbled away, moaning, leaving a trail of blood.
Dors turned toward the others. The two that Seldon had knocked down were still lying there, unarmed and not anxious to get up. She bent down, cut their belts with one of her knives and then slit their trousers. "This way, youll have to hold your pants up when you walk," she said. She stared at the seven men still on their feet, who were watching her with awestruck fascination. "And which of you threw the knife?"
There was silence.
She said, "It doesnt matter to me. Come one at a time or all together, but each time I slash, someone dies."
And with one accord, the seven turned and scurried away. Dors lifted her eyebrows and said to Seldon, "This time, at least, Hummin cant complain that I failed to protect you."
Seldon said, "I still cant believe what I saw. I didnt know you could do anything like that--or talk like that either."
Dors merely smiled. "You have your talents too. We make a good pair. Here, retract your knife blades and put them into your pouch. I think the news will spread with enormous speed and we can get out of Billibotton without fear of being stopped."
She was quite right.
Undercover
DAVAN-- ... In the unsettled times marking the final centuries of the First Galactic Empire, the typical sources of unrest arose from the fact that political and military leaders jockeyed for "supreme" power (a supremacy that grew more worthless with each decade). Only rarely was there anything that could be called a popular movement prior to the advent of psychohistory. In this connection, one intriguing example involves Davan, of whom little is actually known, but who may have met with Hari Seldon at one time when ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

Chapter 72
Both Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili had taken rather lingering baths, making use of the somewhat primitive facilities available to them in the Tisalver household. They had changed their clothing and were in Seldons room when Jirad Tisalver returned in the evening. His signal at the door was (or seemed) rather timid. The buzz did not last long.
Seldon opened the door and said pleasantly, "Good evening, Master Tisalver. And Mistress."
She was standing right behind her husband, forehead puckered into a puzzled frown.
Tisalver said tentatively, as though he was unsure of the situation, "Are you and Mistress Venabili both well?" He nodded his head as though trying to elicit an affirmative by body language.
"Quite well. In and out of Billibotton without trouble and were all washed and changed. Theres no smell left." Seldon lifted his chin as he said it, smiling, tossing the sentence over Tisalvers shoulder to his wife. She sniffed loudly, as though testing the matter.
Still tentatively, Tisalver said, "I understand there was a knife fight."
Seldon raised his eyebrows. "Is that the story?"
"You and the Mistress against a hundred thugs, we were cold, and you killed them all. Is that so?" There was the reluctant sound of deep respect in his voice.
"Absolutely not," Dors put in with sudden annoyance. "Thats ridiculous. What do you think we are? Mass murderers? And do you think a hundred thugs would remain in place, waiting the considerable time it would take me--us--to kill them all? I mean, think about it."
"Thats what theyre saying," said Casilia Tisalver with shrill firmness. "We cant have that sort of thing in this house."
"In the first place," said Seldon, "it wasnt in this house. In the second, it wasnt a hundred men, it was ten. In the third, no one was killed. There was some altercation back and forth, after which they left and made way for us."
"They just made way. Do you expect me to believe that, Outworlders?" demanded Mistress Tisalver belligerently.
Seldon sighed. At the slightest stress, human beings seemed to divide themselves into antagonistic groups. He said, "Well, I grant you one of them was cut a little. Not seriously."
"And you werent hurt at all?" said Tisalver. The admiration in his voice was more marked.
"Not a scratch," said Seldon. "Mistress Venabili handles two knives excellently well."
"I dare say," said Mistress Tisalver, her eyes dropping to Dorss belt, "and thats not what I want to have going on here." Dors said sternly, "As long as no one attacks us here, thats what you wont have here."
"But on account of you," said Mistress Tisalver, "we have trash from the street standing at the doorway."
"My love," said Tisalver soothingly, "let us not anger--"
"Why?" spat his wife with contempt. "Are you afraid of her knives? I would like to see her use them here."
"I have no intention of using them here," said Dors with a sniff as loud as any that Mistress Tisalver had produced. "What is this trash from the street youre talking about?"
Tisalver said, "What my wife means is that an urchin from Billibotton--at least, judging by his appearance--wishes to see you and we are not accustomed to that sort of thing in this neighborhood. It undermines our standing." He sounded apologetic.
Seldon said, "Well, Master Tisalver, well go outside, find out what its all about, and send him on his business as quickly--"
"No. Wait," said Dors, annoyed. "These are our rooms. We pay for them. We decide who visits us and who does not. If there is a young man outside from Billibotton, he is nonetheless a Dahlite. More important, hes a Trantorian. Still more important, hes a citizen of the Empire and a human being. Most important, by asking to see us, he becomes our guest. Therefore, we invite him in to see us."
Mistress Tisalver didnt move. Tisalver himself seemed uncertain.
Dors said, "Since you say I killed a hundred bullies in Billibotton, you surely do not think I am afraid of a boy or, for that matter, of you two." Her right hand dropped casually to her belt.
Tisalver said with sudden energy, "Mistress Venabili, we do not intend to offend you. Of course these rooms are yours and you can entertain whomever you wish here." He stepped back, pulling his indignant wife with him, undergoing a burst of resolution for which he might conceivably have to pay afterward. Dors looked after them sternly.
Seldon smiled dryly. "How unlike you, Dors. I thought I was the one who quixotically got into trouble and that you were the calm and practical one whose only aim was to prevent trouble."
Dors shook her head. "I cant bear to hear a human being spoken of with contempt just because of his group identification--even by other human beings. Its these respectable people here who create those hooligans out there."
"And other respectable people," said Seldon, "who create these respectable people. These mutual animosities are as much a part of humanity--"
"Then youll have to deal with it in your psychohistory, wont you?"
"Most certainly--if there is ever a psychohistory with which to deal with anything at all.--Ah, here comes the urchin under discussion. And its Raych, which somehow doesnt surprise me."

Chapter 73

Raych entered, looking about, clearly intimidated. The forefinger of his right hand reached for his upper lip as though wondering when he would begin to feel the first downy hairs there.
He turned to the clearly outraged Mistress Tisalver and bowed clumsily. "Thank ya, Missus. Ya got a lovely place."
Then, as the door slammed behind him, he turned to Seldon and Dors with an air of easy connoisseurship. "Nice place, guys."
"Im glad you like it," said Seldon solemnly. "How did you know we were here?"
"Followed ya. Howd ya think? Hey, lady"--he turned to Dors--"you dont fight like no dame."
"Have you watched many dames fight?" asked Dors, amused.
Raych rubbed his nose, "No, never seen none whatever. They dont carry knives, except little ones to scare kids with. Never scared me."
"Im sure they didnt. What do you do to make dames draw their knives?"
"Nothin. You just kid around a little. You holler, Hey, lady, lemme-- " He thought about it for a moment and said, "Nothin."
Dors said, "Well, dont try that on me."
"Ya kiddin? After what ya did to Marron? Hey, lady, whered you learn to fight that way?"
"On my own world."
"Could ya teach me?"
"Is that what you came here to see me about?"
"Akchaly, no. I came to bring ya a kind of message."
"From someone who wants to fight me?"
"No one wants to fight ya, lady. Listen, lady, ya got a reputation now. Everybody knows ya. You just walk down anywhere in old Billibotton and all the guys will step aside and let ya pass and grin and make sure they dont look cross-eyed at ya. Oh, lady, ya got it made. Thats why he wants to see ya."
Seldon said, "Raych, just exactly who wants to see us?"
"Guy called Davan."
"And who is he?"
"Just a guy. He lives in Billibotton and dont carry no knife."
"And he stays alive, Raych?"
"He reads a lot and he helps the guys there when they get in trouble with the govment. They kinda leave him alone. He dont need no knife."
"Why didnt he come himself, then?" said Dors. "Why did he send you?"
"He dont like this place. He says it makes him sick. He says all the people here, they lick the govments--" He paused, looked dubiously at the two Outworlders, and said, "Anyway, he wont come here. He said theyd let me in cause I was only a kid." He grinned. "They almost didnt, did they? I mean that lady there who looked like she was smellin somethin?" He stopped suddenly, abashed, and looked down at himself. "Ya dont get much chance to wash where I come from."
"Its all right," said Dors, smiling. "Where are we supposed to meet, then, if he wont come here? After all--if you dont mind--we dont feel like going to Billibotton."
"I told ya," said Raych indignantly. "Ya get free run of Billibotton, I swear. Besides, where he lives no one will bother ya."
"Where is it?" asked Seldon.
"I can take ya there. It aint far."
"And why does he want to see us?" asked Dors.
"Dunno. But he says like this--" Raych half-closed his eyes in an effort to remember. " Tell them I wanna see the man who talked to a Dahlite heatsinker like he was a human being and the woman who beat Marron with knives and didnt kill him when she mighta done so. I think I got it right."
Seldon smiled. "I think you did. Is he ready for us now?"
"Hes waiting."
"Then well come with you." He looked at Dors with a trace of doubt in his eyes.
She said, "All right. Im willing. Perhaps it wont be a trap of some sort. Hope springs eternal--"

Chapter 74

There was a pleasant glow to the evening light when they emerged, a faint violet touch and a pinkish edge to the simulated sunset clouds that were scudding along. Dahl might have complaints of their treatment by the Imperial rulers of Trantor, but surely there was nothing wrong with the weather the computers spun out for them.
Dors said in a low voice, "We seem to be celebrities. No mistake about that."
Seldon brought his eyes down from the supposed sky and was immediately aware of a fair-sized crowd around the apartment house in which the Tisalvers lived. Everyone in the crowd stared at them intently. When it was clear that the two Outworlders had become aware of the attention, a low murmur ran through the crowd, which seemed to be on the point of breaking out into applause.
Dors said, "Now I can see where Mistress Tisalver would find this annoying. I should have been a little more sympathetic."
The crowd was, for the most part, poorly dressed and it was not hard to guess that many of the people were from Billibotton. On impulse, Seldon smiled and raised one hand in a mild greeting that was met with applause. One voice, lost in the safe anonymity of the crowd called out, "Can the lady show us some knife tricks?"
When Dors called back, "No, I only draw in anger," there was instant laughter. One man stepped forward. He was clearly not from Billibotton and bore no obvious mark of being a Dahlite. He had only a small mustache, for one thing, and it was brown, not black. He said, "Marlo Tanto of the Trantorian HV News. Can we have you in focus for a bit for our nightly holocast?"
"No," said Dors shortly. "No interviews."
The newsman did not budge. "I understand you were in a fight with a great many men in Billibotton--and won." He smiled. "Thats news, that is."
"No," said Dors. "We met some men in Billibotton, talked to them, and then moved on. Thats all there is to it and thats all youre going to get."
"Whats your name? You dont sound like a Trantorian."
"I have no name."
"And your friends name?"
"He has no name."
The newsman looked annoyed, "Look, lady. Youre news and Im just trying to do my job."
Raych pulled at Dorss sleeve. She leaned down and listened to his earnest whisper.
She nodded and straightened up again. "I dont think youre a newsman, Mr. Tanto. What I think you are is an Imperial agent trying to make trouble for Dahl. There was no fight and youre trying to manufacture news concerning one as a way of justifying an Imperial expedition into Billibotton. I wouldnt stay here if I were you. I dont think youre very popular with these people."
The crowd had begun to mutter at Dorss first words. They grew louder now and began to drift, slowly and in a menacing way, in the direction of Tanto. He looked nervously around and began to move away.
Dors raised her voice. "Let him go. Dont anyone touch him. Dont give him any excuse to report violence."
And they parted before him.
Raych said, "Aw, lady, you shoulda let them rough him up."
"Bloodthirsty boy," said Dors, "take us to this friend of yours."


Chapter 75

They met the man who called himself Davan in a room behind a dilapidated diner.
Far behind.
Raych led the way, once more showing himself as much at home in the burrows of Billibotton as a mole would be in tunnels underground in Helicon. It was Dors Venabili whose caution first manifested itself.
She stopped and said, "Come back, Raych. Exactly where are we going?"
"To Davan," said Raych, looking exasperated. "I told ya."
"But this is a deserted area. Theres no one living here." Dors looked about with obvious distaste. The surroundings were lifeless and what light panels there were did not glower [but] did so only dimly.
"Its the way Davan likes it," said Raych. "Hes always changing around, staying here, staying there. Ya know ... changing around."
"Why?" demanded Dors.
"Its safer, lady."
"From whom?"
"From the govment."
"Why would the government want Davan?"
"I dunno, lady. Tell ya what. Ill tell ya where he is and tell ya how to go and ya go on alone--if ya dont want me to take ya."
Seldon said, "No, Raych, Im pretty sure well get lost without you. In fact, you had better wait till were through so you can lead us back."
Raych said at once, "Whats in it fme? Ya expect me to hang around when I get hungry?"
"You hang around and get hungry, Raych, and Ill buy you a big dinner. Anything you like."
"Ya say that now. Mister. How do I know?"
Dorss hand flashed and it was holding a knife, blade exposed, "Youre not calling us liars, are you, Raych?"
Raychs eyes opened wide. He did not seem frightened by the threat. He said, "Hey, I didnt see that. Do it again."
"Ill do it afterward--if youre still here. Otherwise"--Dors glared at him--"well track you down."
"Aw, lady, come on," said Raych. "Ya aint gonna track me down. Ya aint that kind. But Ill be here." He struck a pose. "Ya got my word." And he led them onward in silence, though the sound of their shoes was hollow in the empty corridors.
Davan looked up when they entered, a wild look that softened when he saw Raych.
He gestured quickly toward the two others--questioningly.
Raych said, "These are the guys." And, grinning, he left.
Seldon said, "I am Hari Seldon. The young lady is Dors Venabili." He regarded Davan curiously. Davan was swarthy and had the thick black mustache of the Dahlite male, but in addition he had a stubble of beard. He was the first Dahlite whom Seldon had seen who had not been meticulously shaven. Even the bullies of Billibotton had been smooth of cheek and chin. Seldon said, "What is your name, sir?"
"Davan. Raych must have told you."
"Your second name."
"I am only Davan. Were you followed here, Master Seldon?"
"No, Im sure we werent. If we had, then by sound or sight, I expect Raych would have known. And if he had not, Mistress Venabili would have."
Dors smiled slightly. "You have faith in me, Hari."
"More all the time," he said thoughtfully.
Davan stirred uneasily. "Yet youve already been found."
"Found?"
"Yes, I have heard of this supposed newsman."
"Already?" Seldon looked faintly surprised. "But I suspect he really was a newsman ... and harmless. We tatted him an Imperial agent at Raychs suggestion, which was a good idea. The surrounding crowd grew threatening and we got rid of him."
"No," said Davan, "he was what you called him. My people know the man and he does work for the Empire.--But then you do not do as I do. You do not use a false name and change your place of abode. You go under your own names, making no effort to remain undercover. You are Hari Seldon, the mathematician."
"Yes, I am," said Seldon. "Why should I invent a false name?"
"The Empire wants you, does it not?"
Seldon shrugged. "I stay in places where the Empire cannot reach out to take me."
"Not openly, but the Empire doesnt have to work openly. I would urge you to disappear ... really disappear."
"Like you ... as you say," said Seldon looking about with an edge of distaste. The room was as dead as the corridors he had walked through. It was musty through and through and it was overwhelmingly depressing.
"Yes," said Davan. "You could be useful to us."
"In what way?"
"You talked to a young man named Yugo Amaryl."
"Yes, I did."
"Amaryl tells me that you can predict the future."
Seldon sighed heavily. He was tired of standing in this empty room. Davan was sitting on a cushion and there were other cushions available, but they did not look clean. Nor did he wish to lean against the mildew-streaked wall.
He said, "Either you misunderstood Amaryl or Amaryl misunderstood me. What I have done is to prove that it is possible to choose starting conditions from which historical forecasting does not descend into chaotic conditions, but can become predictable within limits. However, what those starting conditions might be I do not know, nor am I sure that those conditions can be found by any one person--or by any number of people--in a finite length of time. Do you understand me?"
"No."
Seldon sighed again. "Then let me try once more. It is possible to predict the future, but it may be impossible to find out how to take advantage of that possibility. Do you understand?"
Davan looked at Seldon darkly, then at Dors. "Then you cant predict the future."
"Now you have the point, Master Davan."
"Just call me Davan. But you may be able to learn to predict the future someday."
"That is conceivable."
"Then thats why the Empire wants you."
"No," Seldon raised his finger didactically. "Its my idea that that is why the Empire is not making an overwhelming effort to get me. They might like to have me if I can be picked up without trouble, but they know that right now I know nothing and that it is therefore not worth upsetting the delicate peace of Trantor by interfering with the local rights of this sector or that. Thats the reason I can move about under my own name with reasonable security."
For a moment, Davan buried his head in his hands and muttered, "This is madness." Then he looked up wearily and said to Dors, "Are you Master Seldons wife?"
Dors said calmly, "I am his friend and protector."
"How well do you know him?"
"We have been together for some months."
"No more?"
"No more."
"Would it be your opinion he is speaking the truth?"
"I know he is, but what reason would you have to trust me if you do not trust him? If Hari is, for some reason, lying to you, might I not be lying to you equally in order to support him?"
Davan looked from one to the other helplessly. Then he said, "Would you, in any case, help us?"
"Who are us and in what way do you need help?"
Davan said, "You see the situation here in Dahl. We are oppressed. You must know that and, from your treatment of Yugo Amaryl, I cannot believe you lack sympathy for us."
"We are fully sympathetic."
"And you must know the source of the oppression."
"You are going to tell me that its the Imperial government, I suppose, and I dare say it plays its part. On the other hand, I notice that there is a middle class in Dahl that despises the heatsinkers and a criminal class that terrorizes the rest of the sector."
Davans lips tightened, but he remained unmoved. "Quite true. Quite true. But the Empire encourages it as a matter of principle. Dahl has the potential for making serious trouble. If the heatsinkers should go on strike, Trantor would experience a severe energy shortage almost at once ... with all that that implies. However, Dahls own upper classes will spend money to hire the hoodlums of Billibotton--and of other places--to fight the heatsinkers and break the strike. It has happened before. The Empire allows some Dahlites to prosper--comparatively--in order to convert them into Imperialist lackeys, while it refuses to enforce the arms-control laws effectively enough to weaken the criminal element.
"The Imperial government does this everywhere--and not in Dahl alone. They cant exert force to impose their will, as in the old days when they ruled with brutal directness. Nowadays, Trantor has grown so complex and so easily disturbed that the Imperial forces must keep their hands off--"
"A form of degeneration," said Seldon, remembering Hummins complaints.
"What?" said Davan.
"Nothing," said Seldon. "Go on."
"The Imperial forces must keep their hands off, but they find that they can do much even so. Each sector is encouraged to be suspicious of its neighbors. Within each sector, economic and social classes are encouraged to wage a kind of war with each other. The result is that all over Trantor it is impossible for the people to take united action. Everywhere, the people would rather fight each other than make a common stand against the central tyranny and the Empire rules without having to exert force."
"And what," said Dors, "do you think can be done about it?"
"Ive been trying for years to build a feeling of solidarity among the peoples of Trantor."
"I can only suppose," said Seldon dryly, "that you are finding this an impossibly difficult and largely thankless task."
"You suppose correctly," said Davan, "but the party is growing stronger. Many of our knifers are coming to the realization that knives are best when they are not used on each other. Those who attacked you in the corridors of Billibotton are examples of the unconverted. However, those who support you now, who are ready to defend you against the agent you thought was a newsman, are my people. I live here among them. It is not an attractive way of life, but I am safe here. We have adherents in neighboring sectors and we spread daily."
"But where do we come in?" asked Dors.
"For one thing," said Davan, "both of you are Outworlders, scholars. We need people like you among our leaders. Our greatest strength is drawn from the poor and the uneducated because they suffer the most, but they can lead the least. A person like one of you two is worth a hundred of them."
"Thats an odd estimate from someone who wishes to rescue the oppressed," said Seldon.
"I dont mean as people," said Davan hastily. "I mean as far as leadership is concerned. The party must have among its leaders men and women of intellectual power."
"People like us, you mean, are needed to give your party a veneer of respectability."
Davan said, "You can always put something noble in a sneering fashion if you try. But you, Master Seldon, are more than respectable, more than intellectual. Even if you wont admit to being able to penetrate the mists of the future--"
"Please, Davan," said Seldon, "dont be poetic and dont use the conditional. Its not a matter of admitting. I cant foresee the future. Those are not mists that block the view but chrome steel barriers."
"Let me finish. Even if you cant actually predict with--what do you call it?--psychohistorical accuracy, youve studied history and you may have a certain intuitive feeling for consequences. Now, isnt that so?"
Seldon shook his head. "I may have a certain intuitive understanding for mathematical likelihood, but how far I can translate that into anything of historical significance is quite uncertain. Actually, I have not studied history. I wish I had. I feel the loss keenly."
Dors said evenly, "I am the historian, Davan, and I can say a few things if you wish."
"Please do," said Davan, making it half a courtesy, half a challenge.
"For one thing, there have been many revolutions in Galactic history that have overthrown tyrannies, sometimes on individual planets, sometimes in groups of them, occasionally in the Empire itself or in the pre-Imperial regional governments. Often, this has only meant a change in tyranny. In other words, one ruling class is replaced by another--sometimes by one that is more efficient and therefore still more capable of maintaining itself--while the poor and downtrodden remain poor and downtrodden or become even worse off."
Davan, listening intently, said, "Im aware of that. We all are. Perhaps we can learn from the past and know better what to avoid. Besides, the tyranny that now exists is actual. That which may exist in the future is merely potential. If we are always to draw back from change with the thought that the change may be for the worse, then there is no hope at all of ever escaping injustice."
Dors said, "A second point you must remember is that even if you have right on your side, even if justice thunders condemnation, it is usually the tyranny in existence that has the balance of force on its side. There is nothing your knife handlers can do in the way of rioting and demonstrating that will have any permanent effect as long as, in the extremity, there is an army equipped with kinetic, chemical, and neurological weapons that is willing to use them against your people. You can get all the downtrodden and even all the respectables on your side, but you must somehow win over the security forces and the Imperial army or at least seriously weaken their loyalty to the rulers."
Davan said, "Trantor is a multigovernmental world. Each sector has its own rulers and some of them are themselves anti-Imperial. If we can have a strong sector on our side, that would change the situation, would it not? We would then not be merely ragamuffins fighting with knives and stones."
"Does that mean you do have a strong sector on your side or merely that it is your ambition to have one?"
Davan was silent.
Dors said, "I shall assume that you are thinking of the Mayor of Wye. If the Mayor is in the mood to make use of popular discontent as a way of improving the chance of toppling the Emperor, doesnt it strike you that the end the Mayor would have in view would be that of succeeding to the Imperial throne? Why should the Mayor risk his present not-inconsiderable position for anything less? Merely for the blessings of justice and the decent treatment of people, concerning whom he can have little interest?"
"You mean," said Davan, "that any powerful leader who is willing to help us may then betray us."
"It is a situation that is all too common in Galactic history."
"If we are ready for that, might we not betray him?"
"You mean, make use of him and then, at some crucial moment, subvert the leader of his forces--or a leader, at any rate--and have him assassinated?"
"Not perhaps exactly like that, but some way of getting rid of him might exist if that should prove necessary."
"Then we have a revolutionary movement in which the principal players must be ready to betray each other, with each simply waiting for the opportunity. It sounds like a recipe for chaos."
"You will not help us, then?" said Davan.
Seldon, who had been listening to the exchange between Davan and Dors with a puzzled frown on his face, said, "We cant put it that simply. We would like to help you. We are on your side. It seems to me that no sane man wants to uphold an Imperial system that maintains itself by fostering mutual hatred and suspicions. Even when it seems to work, it can only be described as meta-stable; that is, as too apt to fall into instability in one direction or another. But the question is: How can we help? If I had psychohistory, if I could tell what is most likely to happen, or if I could tell what action of a number of alternative possibilities is most likely to bring on an apparently happy consequence, then I would put my abilities at your disposal.--But I dont have it. I can help you best by trying to develop psychohistory."
"And how long will that take?"
Seldon shrugged. "I cannot say."
"How can you ask us to wait indefinitely?"
"What alternative do I have, since I am useless to you as I am? But I will say this: I have until very recently been quite convinced that the development of psychohistory was absolutely impossible. Now I am not so certain of that."
"You mean you have a solution in mind?"
"No, merely an intuitive feeling that a solution might be possible. I have not been able to pin down what has occurred to make me have that feeling. It may be an illusion, but I am trying. Let me continue to try.--Perhaps [then well] meet again."
"Or perhaps," said Davan, "if you return to where you are now staying, you will eventually find yourself in an Imperial trap. You may think that the Empire will leave you alone while you struggle with psychohistory, but I am certain the Emperor and his toady Demerzel are in no mood to wait forever, any more than I am."
"It will do them no good to hasten," said Seldon calmly, "since I am not on their side, as I am on yours.--Come, Dors."
They turned and left Davan, sitting alone in his squalid room, and found Raych waiting for them outside.


Chapter 76
Raych was eating, licking his fingers, and crumpling the bag in which the food--whatever it was--had been. A strong smell of onions pervaded the air--different somehow, yeast-based perhaps.
Dors, retreating a little from the odor, said, "Where did you get the food from, Raych?"
"Davans guys. They brought it to me. Davans okay."
"Then we dont have to buy you dinner, do we?" said Seldon, conscious of his own empty stomach.
"Ya owe me somethin," said Raych, looking greedily in Dorss direction. "How about the ladys knife? One of em."
"No knife," said Dors. "You get us back safely and Ill give you five credits."
"Cant get no knife for five credits," grumbled Raych.
"Youre not getting anything but five credits," said Dors.
"Youre a lousy dame, lady," said Raych.
"Im a lousy dame with a quick knife, Raych, so get moving."
"All right. Dont get all perspired." Raych waved his hand. "This way."
It was back through the empty corridors, but this time Dors, looking this way and that, stopped. "Hold on, Raych. Were being followed."
Raych looked exasperated. "Ya aint supposed to hear em."
Seldon said, bending his head to one side, "I dont hear anything."
"I do," said Dors. "Now, Raych, I dont want any fooling around. You tell me right now whats going on or Ill rap your head so that you wont see straight for a week. I mean it."
Raych held up one arm defensively. "You try it, you lousy dame. You try it. Its Davans guys. Theyre just taking care of us, in case any knifers come along."
"Davans guys?"
"Yeah. Theyre goin along the service corridors."
Dorss right hand shot out and seized Raych by the scruff of his upper garment. She lifted and he dangled, shouting, "Hey, lady. Hey!"
Seldon said, "Dors! Dont be hard on him."
"Ill be harder still if I think hes lying. Youre my charge, Hari, not he."
"Im not lyin," said Raych, struggling. "Im not."
"Im sure he isnt," said Seldon.
"Well, well see. Raych, tell them to come out where we can see them." She let him drop and dusted her hands.
"Youre some kind of nut, lady," said Raych aggrievedly. Then he raised his voice. "Yay, Davan! Come out here, some of ya guys!"
There was a wait and then, from an unlit opening along the corridor, two dark-mustached men came out, one with a scar running the length of his cheek. Each held the sheath of a knife in his hand, blade withdrawn.
"How many more of you are there?" asked Dors harshly.
"A few," said one of the newcomers. "Orders. Were guarding you. Davan wants you safe."
"Thank you. Try to be even quieter. Raych, keep on moving."
Raych said sulkily, "Ya roughed me up when I was telling the truth."
"Youre right," said Dors. "At least, I think youre right ... and I apologize."
"Im not sure I should accept," said Raych, trying to stand tall. "But awright, just this once." He moved on.
When they reached the walkway, the unseen corps of guards vanished. At least, even Dorss keen ears could hear them no more. By now, though, they were moving into the respectable part of the sector.
Dors said thoughtfully, "I dont think we have clothes that would fit you, Raych."
Raych said, "Why do ya want clothes to fit me, Missus?" (Respectability seemed to invade Raych once they were out of the corridors.) "I got clothes."
"I thought youd like to come into our place and take a bath."
Raych said, "What for? Ill wash one o these days. And Ill put on my other shirt." He looked up at Dors shrewdly. "Youre sorry ya roughed me up. Right? Ya tryin to make up?"
Dors smiled. "Yes. Sort of."
Raych waved a hand in lordly fashion. "Thats all right. Ya didnt hurt. Listen. Youre strong for a lady. Ya lifted me up like I was nothin."
"I was annoyed, Raych. I have to be concerned about Master Seldon."
"Ya sort of his bodyguard?" Raych looked at Seldon inquiringly. "Ya got a lady for a bodyguard?"
"I cant help it," said Seldon smiling wryly. "She insists. And she certainly knows her job."
Dors said, "Think again, Raych. Are you sure you wont have a bath? A nice warm bath."
Raych said, "I got no chance. Ya think that lady is gonna let me in the house again?"
Dors looked up and saw Casilia Tisalver outside the front door of the apartment complex, staring first at the Outworld woman and then at the slum-bred boy. It would have been impossible to tell in which case her expression was angrier.
Raych said, "Well, so long, Mister and Missus. I dont know if shell let either of ya in the house." He placed his hands in his pocket and swaggered off in a fine affectation of carefree indifference.
Seldon said, "Good evening, Mistress Tisalver. Its rather late, isnt it?"
"Its very late," she replied. "There was a near riot today outside this very complex because of that newsman you pushed the street vermin at."
"We didnt push anyone on anyone," said Dors.
"I was there," said Mistress Tisalver intransigently. "I saw it." She stepped aside to let them enter, but delayed long enough to make her reluctance quite plain.
"She acts as though that was the last straw," said Dors as she and Seldon made their way up to their rooms.
"So? What can she do about it?" asked Seldon.
"I wonder," said Dors.
Officers
RAYCH-- ... According to Hari Seldon, the original meeting with Raych was entirely accidental. He was simply a gutter urchin from whom Seldon had asked directions. But his life, from that moment on, continued to be intertwined with that of the great mathematician until ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

Chapter 77
The next morning, dressed from the waist down, having washed and shaved, Seldon knocked on the door that led to Dorss adjoining room and said in a moderate voice, "Open the door, Dors."
She did. The short reddish-gold curls of her hair were still wet and she too was dressed only from the waist down.
Seldon stepped back in embarrassed alarm. Dors looked down at the swell of her breasts indifferently and wrapped a towel around her head. "What is it?" she asked.
Seldon said, looking off to his right, "I was going to ask you about Wye."
Dors said very naturally, "About why in connection with what? And for goodness sake, dont make me talk to your ear. Surely, youre not a virgin."
Seldon said in a hurt tone, "I was merely trying to be polite. If you dont mind, I certainly dont. And its not why about what. Im asking about the Wye Sector."
"Why do you want to know? Or, if you prefer: Why Wye?"
"Look, Dors, Im serious. Every once in a while, the Wye Sector is mentioned--the Mayor of Wye, actually. Hummin mentioned him, you did, Davan did. I dont know anything about either the sector or the Mayor."
"Im not a native Trantorian either, Hari. I know very little, but youre welcome to what I do know. Wye is near the south pole--quite large, very populous--"
"Very populous at the south pole?"
"Were not on Helicon, Hari. Or on Cinna either. This is Trantor. Everything is underground and underground at the poles or underground at the equator is pretty much the same. Of course, I imagine they keep their day-night arrangements rather extreme--long days in their summer, long nights in their winter--almost as it would be on the surface. The extremes are just affectation; theyre proud of being polar."
"But Upperside they must be cold, indeed."
"Oh yes. The Wye Upperside is snow and ice, but it doesnt lie as thickly there as you might think. If it did, it might crush the dome, but it doesnt and that is the basic reason for Wyes power."
She turned to her mirror, removed the towel from her head, and threw the dry-net over her hair, which, in a matter of five seconds, gave it a pleasant sheen. She said, "You have no idea how glad I am not to be wearing a skincap," as she put on the upper portion of her clothing.
"What has the ice layer to do with Wyes power?"
"Think about it. Forty billion people use a great deal of power and every calorie of it eventually degenerates into heat and has to be gotten rid of. Its piped to the poles, particularly to the south pole, which is the more developed of the two, and is discharged into space. It [melts] most of the ice in the process and Im sure that accounts for Trantors clouds and rains, no matter how much the meteorology boggins insist that things are more complicated than that."
"Does Wye make use of the power before discharging it?"
"They may, for all I know. I havent the slightest idea, by the way, as to the technology involved in discharging the heat, but Im talking about political power. If Dahl were to stop producing usable energy, that would certainly inconvenience Trantor, but there are other sectors that produce energy and can up their production and, of course, there is stored energy in one form or another. Eventually, Dahl would have to be dealt with, but there would be time. Wye, on the other hand--"
"Yes?"
"Well, Wye gets rid of at least 90 percent of all the heat developed on Trantor and there is no substitute. If Wye were to shut down its heat emission, the temperature would start going up all over Trantor."
"In Wye too."
"[Yes], but since Wye is at the south pole, it can arrange an influx of cold air. It wouldnt do much good, but Wye would last longer than the rest of Trantor. The point is, then, that Wye is a very touchy problem for the Emperor and the Mayor of Wye is--or at least can be--extremely powerful."
"And what kind of a person is the present Mayor of Wye?"
"That I dont know. What Ive occasionally heard would make it seem that he is very old and pretty much a recluse, but hard as a hypership hull and still cleverly maneuvering for power."
"Why, I wonder? If hes that old, he couldnt hold the power for long."
"Who knows, Hari? A lifelong obsession, I suppose. Or else its the game ... the maneuvering for power, without any real longing for the power itself. Probably if he had the power and took over Demerzels place or even the Imperial throne itself, he would feel disappointed because the game would be over. Of course he might, if he was still alive, begin the subsequent game of keeping power, which might be just as difficult and just as satisfying."
Seldon shook his head. "It strikes me that no one could possibly want to be Emperor."
"No sane person would, I [free], but the Imperial wish, as it is frequently called, is like a disease that, when caught, drives out sanity. And the closer you get to high office, the more likely you are to catch the disease. With each ensuing promotion--"
"The disease grows still more acute. Yes, I can see that. But it also seems to me that Trantor is so huge a world, so interlocking in its needs and so conflicting in its ambitions, that it makes up the major part of the inability of the Emperor to rule. Why doesnt he just leave Trantor and establish himself on some simpler world?"
Dors laughed. "You wouldnt ask that if you knew your history. Trantor is the Empire through thousands of years of custom. An Emperor who is not at the Imperial Palace is not the Emperor. He is a place, even more than a person." Seldon sank into silence, his face rigid, and after a while Dors asked, "Whats the matter, Hari?"
"Im thinking," he said in a muffled voice. "Ever since you told me that hand-on-thigh story, Ive had fugitive thoughts that--Now your remark about the Emperor being a place rather than a person seems to have struck a chord."
"What kind of chord?"
Seldon shook his head. "Im still thinking. I may be all wrong." His glance at Dors sharpened, his eyes coming into focus. "In any case, we ought to go down and have breakfast. Were late and I dont think Mistress Tisalver is in a good enough humor to have it brought in for us."
"You optimist," said Dors. "My own feeling is that shes not in a good enough humor to want us to stay--breakfast or not. She wants us out of here."
"That may be, but were paying her."
"Yes, but I suspect she hates us enough by now to scorn our credits."
"Perhaps her husband will feel a bit more affectionate concerning the rent."
"If he has a single word to say, Hari, the only person who would be more surprised than me to hear it would be Mistress Tisalver.--Very well, Im ready."
And they moved down the stairs to the Tisalver portion of the apartment to find the lady in question waiting for them with less than breakfast--and with considerably more too.


Chapter 78
Casilia Tisalver stood ramrod straight with a tight smile on her round face and her dark eyes glinting. Her husband was leaning moodily against the wall. In the center of the room were two men who were standing stiffly upright, as though they had noticed the cushions on the floor but scorned them. Both had the dark crisp hair and the chick black mustache to be expected of Dahlites. Both were thin and both were dressed in dark clothes so nearly alike that they were surely uniforms. There was thin white piping up and over the shoulders and down the sides of the tubular trouser legs. Each had, on the right side of his chest, a rather dim Spaceship-and-Sun, the symbol of the Galactic Empire on every inhabited world of the Galaxy, with, in this case, a dark "D" in the center of the sun.
Seldon realized immediately that these were two members of the Dahlite security forces.
"Whats all this?" said Seldon sternly.
One of the men stepped forward. "I am Sector Officer Lanel Russ. This is my partner, Gebore Astinwald."
Both presented glittering identification holo-tabs. Seldon didnt bother looking at them. "What it is you want?"
Russ said calmly, "Are you Hari Seldon of Helicon?"
"I am."
"And are you Dors Venabili of Cinna, Mistress?"
"I am," said Dors.
"Im here to investigate a complaint that one Hari Seldon instigated a riot yesterday."
"I did no such thing," said Seldon.
"Our information is," said Russ, looking at the screen of a small computer pad, "that you accused a newsman of being an Imperial agent, thus instigating a riot against him."
Dors said, "It was I who said he was an Imperial agent, Officer. I had reason to think he was. It is surely no crime to express ones opinion. The Empire has freedom of speech."
"That does not cover an opinion deliberately advanced in order to instigate a riot."
"How can you say it was, Officer?"
At this point, Mistress Tisalver interposed in a shrill voice, "I can say it, Officer. She saw there was a crowd present, a crowd of gutter people who were just looking for trouble. She deliberately said he was an Imperial agent when she knew nothing of the sort and she shouted it to the crowd to stir them up. It was plain that she knew what she was doing."
"Casilia," said her husband pleadingly, but she cast one look at him and he said no more.
Russ turned to Mistress Tisalver. "Did you lodge the complaint, Mistress?"
"Yes. These two have been living here for a few days and theyve done nothing but make trouble. Theyve invited people of low reputation into my apartment, damaging my standing with my neighbors."
"Is it against the law, Officer," asked Seldon, "to invite clean, quiet citizens of Dahl into ones room? The two rooms upstairs are our rooms. We have rented them and they are paid for. Is it a crime to speak to Dahlites in Dahl, Officer?"
"No, it is not," said Russ. "That is not part of the complaint. What gave you reason, Mistress Venabili, to suppose the person you so accused was, in fact, an Imperial agent?"
Dors said, "He had a small brown mustache, from which I concluded he was not a Dahlite. I surmised he was an Imperial agent."
"You surmised? Your associate, Master Seldon, has no mustache at all. Do you surmise he is an Imperial agent?"
"In any case," said Seldon hastily, "there was no riot. We asked the crowd to take no action against the supposed newsman and Im sure they didnt."
"Youre sure, Master Seldon?" said Russ. "Our information is that you left immediately after making your accusation. How could you witness what happened after you left?"
"I couldnt," said Seldon, "but let me ask you--Is the man dead? Is the man hurt?"
"The man has been interviewed. He denies he is an Imperial agent and we have no information that he is. He also claims he was handled roughly."
"He may well be lying in both respects," said Seldon. "I would suggest a Psychic Probe."
"That cannot be done on the victim of a crime," said Russ. "The sector government is very firm on that. It might do if you two, as the criminals in this case, each underwent a Psychic Probe. Would you like us to do that?"
Seldon and Dors exchanged glances for a moment, then Seldon said, "No, of course not."
"Of course not," repeated Russ with just a tinge of sarcasm in his voice, "but youre ready enough to suggest it for someone else." The other officer, Astinwald, who had so far not said a word, smiled at this. Russ said, "We also have information that two days ago you engaged in a knife fight in Billibotton and badly hurt a Dahlite citizen named"--he struck a button on his computer pad and studied the new page on the screen--"Elgin Marron."
Dors said, "Does your information tell you how the fight started?"
"That is irrelevant at the moment, Mistress. Do you deny that the fight took place?"
"Of course we dont deny the fight took place," said Seldon hotly, "but we deny that we in any way instigated that. We were attacked. Mistress Venabili was seized by this Marron and it was clear he was attempting to rape her. What happened afterward was pure self-defense. Or does Dahl condone rape?"
Russ said with very little intonation in his voice, "You say you were attacked? By how many?"
"Ten men."
"And you alone--with a woman--defended yourself against ten men?"
"Mistress Venabili and I defended ourselves. Yes."
"How is it, then, that neither of you shows any damage whatever? Are either of you cut or bruised where it doesnt show right now?"
"No, Officer."
"How is it, then, that in the fight of one--plus a woman--against ten, you are in no way hurt, but that the complainant, Elgin Marron, has been hospitalized with wounds and will require a skin transplant on his upper lip?"
"We fought well," said Seldon grimly.
"Unbelievably well. What would you say if I told you that three men have testified that you and your friend attacked Marron, unprovoked?"
"I would say that it belies belief that we should. Im sure that Marron has a record as a brawler and knifeman. I tell you that there were ten there. Obviously, six refused to swear to a lie. Do the other three explain why they did not come to the help of their friend if they witnessed him under unprovoked attack and in danger of his life? It must be clear to you that they are lying."
"Do you suggest a Psychic Probe for them?"
"Yes. And before you ask, I still refuse to consider one for us."
Russ said, "We have also received information that yesterday, after leaving the scene of the riot, you consulted with one Davan, a known subversive who is wanted by the security police. Is that true?"
"Youll have to prove that without help from us," said Seldon. "Were not answering any further questions."
Russ put away his pad. "Im afraid I must ask you to come with us to headquarters for further interrogation."
"I dont think thats necessary, Officer," said Seldon. "We are Outworlders who have done nothing criminal. We have tried to avoid a newsman who was annoying us unduly, we tried to protect ourselves against rape and possible murder in a part of the sector known for criminal behavior, and weve spoken to various Dahlites. We see nothing there to warrant our further questioning. It would come under the heading of harassment."
"We make these decisions," said Russ. "Not you. Will you please come with us?"
"No, we will not," said Dors.
"Watch out!" cried out Mistress Tisalver. "Shes got two knives."
Officer Russ sighed and said, "Thank you, Mistress, but I know she does." He turned to Dors. "Do you know its a serious crime to carry a knife without a permit in this sector? Do you have a permit?"
"No, Officer, I dont."
"It was clearly with an illegal knife, then, that you assaulted Marron? Do you realize that that greatly increases the seriousness of the crime?"
"It was no crime, Officer," said Dors. "Understand that. Marron had a knife as well and no permit, I am certain."
"We have no evidence to that effect and while Marron has knife wounds, neither of you have any."
"Of course he had a knife, Officer. If you dont know that every man in Billibotton and most men elsewhere in Dahl carry knives for which they probably dont have permits, then youre the only man in Dahl who doesnt know. There are shops here wherever you turn that sell knives openly. Dont you know that?"
Russ said, "It doesnt matter what I know or dont know in this respect. Nor does it matter whether other people are breaking the law or how many of them do. All that matters at this moment is that Mistress Venabili is breaking the anti-knife law. I must ask you to give up those knives to me right now, Mistress, and the two of you must then accompany me to headquarters."
Dors said, "In that case, take my knives away from me."
Russ sighed. "You must not think, Mistress, that knives are all the weapons there are in Dahl or that I need engage you in a knife fight. Both my partner and I have blasters that will destroy you in a moment, before you can drop your hands to your knife hilt--however fast you are. We wont use a blaster, of course, because we are not here to kill you. However, each of us also has a neuronic whip, which we can use on you freely. I hope you wont ask for a demonstration. It wont kill you, do you permanent harm of any kind, or leave any marks--but the pain is excruciating. My partner is holding a neuronic whip on you right now. And here is mine.--Now, let us have your knives, Mistress Venabili."
There was a moments pause and then Seldon said, "Its no use, Dors. Give him your knives."
And at that moment, a frantic pounding sounded at the door and they all heard a voice raised in high-pitched expostulation.


Chapter 79

Raych had not entirely left the neighborhood after he had walked them back to their apartment house.
He had eaten well while waiting for the interview with Davan to be done and later had slept a bit after finding a bathroom that more or less worked. He really had no place to go now that all that was done. He had a home of sorts and a mother who was not likely to be perturbed if he stayed away for a while. She never was.
He did not know who his father was and wondered sometimes if he really had one. He had been told he had to have one and the reasons for that had been explained to him crudely enough. Sometimes he wondered if he ought to believe so peculiar a story, but he did find the details titillating. He thought of that in connection with the lady. She was an old lady, of course, but she was pretty and she could fight like a man--better than a man. It filled him with vague notions.
And she had offered to let him take a bath. He could swim in the Billibotton pool sometimes when he had some credits he didnt need for anything else or when he could sneak in. Those were the only times he got wet all over, but it was chilly and he had to wait to get dry.
Taking a bath was different. There would be hot water, soap, towels, and warm air. He wasnt sure what it would feel like, except that it would be nice if she was there.
He was walkway-wise enough to know of places where he could park himself in an alley off a walkway that would be near a bathroom and still be near enough to where she was, yet where he probably wouldnt be found and made to run away. He spent the night thinking strange thoughts. What if he did learn to read and write? Could he do something with that? He wasnt sure what, but maybe they could tell him. He had vague ideas of being paid money to do things he didnt know how to do now, but he didnt know what those things might be. He would have to be told, but how do you get told?
If he stayed with the man and the lady, they might help. But why should they want him to stay with them?
He drowsed off, coming to later, not because the light was brightening, but because his sharp ears caught the heightening and deepening of sounds from the walkway as the activities of the day began.
He had learned to identify almost every variety of sound, because in the underground maze of Billibotton, if you wanted to survive with even a minimum of comfort, you had to be aware of things before you saw them. And there was something about the sound of a ground-car motor that he now heard that signaled danger to him. It had an official sound, a hostile sound. He shook himself awake and stole quietly toward the walkway. He scarcely needed to see the Spaceship-and-Sun on the ground-car. Its lines were enough. He knew they had to be coming for the man and the lady because they had seen Davan.
He did not pause to question his thoughts or to analyze them. He was off on a run, beating his way through the gathering life of the day. He was back in less than fifteen minutes. The ground-car was still there and there were curious and cautious onlookers gazing at it from all sides and from a respectful distance. There would soon be more. He pounded his way up the stairs, trying to remember which door he should bang on. No time for the elevator. He found the door--at least he thought he did--and he banged, shouting in a squeak, "Lady! Lady!"
He was too excited to remember her name, but he remembered part of the mans.
"Hari!" he shouted. "Let me in."
The door opened and he rushed in--tried to rush in. The rough hand of an officer seized his arm. "Hold it, kid. Where do you think youre going?"
"Leggo! I aint done nothin." He looked about. "Hey, lady, whatre they doin?"
"Arresting us," said Dors grimly.
"What for?" said Raych, panting and struggling. "Hey, leggo, you Sunbadger. Dont go with him, lady. You dont have to go with him."
"You get out," said Russ, shaking the boy vehemently.
"No, I aint, You aint either, Sunbadger. My whole gang is coming. You aint gettin out, lessn you let these guys go."
"What whole gang?" said Russ, frowning.
"Theyre right outside now. Probly takin your ground-car apart. And theyll take yore apart."
Russ turned toward his partner, "Call headquarters. Have them send out a couple of trucks with Macros."
"No!" shrieked Raych, breaking loose and rushing at Astinwald. "Dont call!"
Russ leveled his neuronic whip and fired.
Raych shrieked, grasped at his right shoulder, and fell down, wriggling madly. Russ had not yet turned back to Seldon, when the latter, seizing him by the wrist, pushed the neuronic whip up in the air and then around and behind, while stamping on his foot to keep him relatively motionless. Hari could feel the shoulder dislocate, even while Russ emitted a hoarse, agonized yell. Astinwald raised his blaster quickly, but Dorss left arm was around his shoulder and the knife in her right hand was at his throat.
"Dont move!" she said. "Move a millimeter, any part of you, and I cut you through your neck to the spine.--drop the blaster. drop it! And the neuronic whip."
Seldon picked up Raych, still moaning, and held him tightly. He turned to Tisalver and said, "There are people out there. Angry people. Ill have them in here and theyll break up everything youve got. Theyll smash the walls. If you dont want that to happen, pick up those weapons and throw them into the next room. Take the weapons from the security officer on the door and do the same. Quickly! Get your wife to help. Shell think twice next time before sending in complaints against innocent people.--Dors, this one on the floor wont do anything for a while. Put the other one out of action, but dont kill him."
"Right," said Dors. Reversing her knife, she struck him hard on the skull with the haft. He went to his knees.
She made a face. "I hate doing that."
"They fired at Raych," said Seldon, trying to mask his own sick feeling at what had happened.
They left the apartment hurriedly and, once out on the walkway, found it choked with people, almost all men, who raised a shout when they saw them emerge. They pushed in close and the smell of poorly washed humanity was overpowering. Someone shouted, "Where are the Sunbadgers?"
"Inside," called out Dors piercingly. "Leave them alone. Theyll be helpless for a while, but theyll get reinforcements, so get out of here fast."
"What about you?" came from a dozen throats.
"Were getting out too. We wont be back."
"Ill take care of them," shrilled Raych, struggling out of Seldons arms and standing on his feet. He was rubbing his right shoulder madly. "I can walk. Lemme past."
The crowd opened for him and he said, "Mister, lady, come with me. Fast!" They were accompanied down the walkway by several dozen men and then Raych suddenly gestured at an opening and muttered, "In here, folks. Ill rake ya to a place no one will ever find ya. Even Davan probly dont know it. Only thing is, we got to go through the sewer levels. No one will see us there, but its sort of stinky ... know what I mean?"
"I imagine well survive," muttered Seldon.
And down they went along a narrow spiraling ramp and up rose the mephitic odors to greet them.

Chapter 80
Raych found them a hiding place. It had meant climbing up the metal rungs of a ladder and it had led them to a large loftlike room, the use of which Seldon could not imagine. It was filled with equipment, bulky and silent, the function of which also remained a mystery. The room was reasonably clean and free of dust and a steady draft of air wafted through that prevented the dust from settling and--more important seemed to lessen the odor.
Raych seemed pleased. "Aint this nice?" he demanded. He still rubbed his shoulder now and then and winced when he rubbed too hard.
"It could be worse," said Seldon. "Do you know what this place is used for, Raych?"
Raych shrugged or began to do so and winced. "I dunno," he said. Then he added with a touch of swagger, "Who cares?"
Dors, who had sat down on the floor after brushing it with her hand and then looking suspiciously at her palm, said, "If you want a guess, I think this is part of a complex that is involved in the detoxification and recycling of wastes. The stuff must surely end up as fertilizer."
"Then," said Seldon gloomily, "those who run the complex will be down here periodically and may come at any moment, for all we know."
"I been here before," said Raych. "I never saw no one here."
"I suppose Trantor is heavily automated wherever possible and if anything calls for automation it would be this treatment of wastes," said Dors. "We may be safe ... for a while."
"Not for long. Well get hungry and thirsty, Dors."
"I can get food and water for us," said Raych. "Ya got to know how to make out if youre an alley kid."
"Thank you, Raych," said Seldon absently, "but right now Im not hungry." He sniffed. "I may never be hungry again."
"You will be," said Dors, "and even if you lose your appetite for a while, youll get thirsty. At least elimination is no problem. Were practically living over what is clearly an open sewer."
There was silence for a while. The light was dim and Seldon wondered why the Trantorians didnt keep it dark altogether. But then it occurred to him that he had never encountered true darkness in any public area. It was probably a habit in an energy-rich society. Strange that a world of forty billion should be energy-rich, but with the internal heat of the planet to draw upon, to say nothing of solar energy and nuclear fusion plants in space, it was. In fact, come to think of it, there was no energy-poor planet in the Empire. Was there a time when technology had been so primitive that energy poverty was possible? He leaned against a system of pipes through which--for all he knew--sewage ran. He drew away from the pipes as the thought occurred to him and he sat down next to Dors.
He said, "Is there any way we can get in touch with Chetter Hummin?"
Dors said, "As a matter of fact, I did send a message, though I hated to."
"You hated to?"
"My orders are to protect you. Each time I have to get in touch with him, it means Ive failed."
Seldon regarded her out of narrowed eyes. "Do you have to be so compulsive, Dors? You cant protect me against the security officers of an entire sector."
"I suppose not. We can disable a few--"
"I know. We did. But theyll send out reinforcements ... armored ground-cars ... neuronic cannon ... sleeping mist. Im not sure what they have, but theyre going to throw in their entire armory. Im sure of it."
"Youre probably right," said Dors, her mouth tightening.
"They wont find ya, lady," said Raych suddenly. His sharp eyes had moved from one to the other as they talked. "They never find Davan."
Dors smiled without joy and ruffled the boys hair, then looked at the palm of her hand with a little dismay. She said, "Im not sure if you ought to stay with us, Raych. I dont want them finding you."
"They wont find me and if I leave ya, wholl get ya food and water and wholl find ya new hidin places, so the Sunbadgersll never know where to look?"
"No, Raych, theyll find us. They dont really look too hard for Davan. He annoys them, but I suspect they dont take him seriously. Do you know what I mean?"
"You mean hes just a pain in the ... the neck and they figure he aint worth chasing all over the lot."
"Yes, thats what I mean. But you see, we hurt two of the officers very badly and theyre not going to let us get away with that. If it takes their whole force--if they have to sweep through every hidden or unused corridor in the sector--theyll get us."
Raych said, "That makes me feel like ... like [natinn]. If I didnt run in there and get zapped, ya wouldnt have taken out them officers and ya wouldnt be in such trouble."
"No, sooner or later, wed have--uh--taken them out. Who knows? We may have to take out a few more."
"Well, ya did it beautiful," said Raych. "If I hadnt been aching all over, I couldve watched more and enjoyed it."
Seldon said, "It wouldnt do us any good to try to fight the entire security system. The question is: What will they do to us once they have us? A prison sentence, surely."
"Oh no. If necessary, well have to appeal to the Emperor," put in Dors.
"The Emperor?" said Raych, wide-eyed. "You know the Emperor?"
Seldon waved at the boy. "Any Galactic citizen can appeal to the Emperor.--That strikes me as the wrong thing to do, Dors. Ever since Hummin and I left the Imperial Sector, weve been evading the Emperor."
"Not to the extent of being thrown into a Dahlite prison. The Imperial appeal will serve as a delay--in any case, a diversion--and perhaps in the course of that delay, we can think of something else."
"Theres Hummin."
"Yes, there is," said Dors uneasily, "but we cant consider him the do-it-all. For one thing, even if my message reached him and even if he was able to rush to Dahl, how would he find us here? And, even if he did, what could he do against the entire Dahlite security force?"
"In that case," said Seldon. "Were going to have to think of something we can do before they find us."
Raych said, "If ya follow me, I can keep ya ahead of them. I know every place there is around here."
"You can keep us ahead of one person, but therell be a great many, moving down any number of corridors. Well escape one group and bump into another."
They sat in uncomfortable silence for a good while, each confronting what seemed to be a hopeless situation. Then Dors Venabili stirred and said in a tense, low whisper, "Theyre here. I hear them."
For a while, they strained, listening, then Raych sprang to his feet and hissed, "They comin that way. We gotta go this way."
Seldon, confused, heard nothing at all, but would have been content to trust the others superior hearing, but even as Raych began moving hastily and quietly away from the direction of the approaching tread, a voice rang out echoing against the sewer walls. "Dont move. Dont move."
And Raych said, "Thats Davan. Howd he know we were here?"
"Davan?" said Seldon. "Are you sure?"
"Sure Im sure. Hell help."

Chapter 81
Davan asked, "What happened?"
Seldon felt minimally relieved. Surely, the addition of Davan could scarcely count against the full force of the Dahl Sector, but, then again, he commanded a number of people who might create enough confusion.
He said, "You should know, Davan. I suspect that many of the crowd who were at Tisalvers place this morning were your people."
"Yes, a number were. The story is that you were being arrested and that you manhandled a squadron of Sunbadgers. But why were you being arrested?"
"Two," said Seldon, lifting two fingers. "Two Sunbadgers. And thats bad enough. Part of the reason we were being arrested was that we had gone to see you."
"Thats not enough. The Sunbadgers dont bother with me much as a general thing." He added bitterly, "They underestimate me."
"Maybe," said Seldon, "but the woman from whom we rent our rooms reported us for having started a riot ... over the newsman we ran into on our way to you. You know about that. With your people on the scene yesterday and again this morning and with two officers badly hurt, they may well decide to clean out these corridors--and that means you will suffer. I really am sorry. I had no intention or expectation of being the cause of any of this."
But Davan shook his head. "No, you dont know the Sunbadgers. Thats not enough either. They dont want to clean us up. The sector would have to do something about us if they did. Theyre only too happy to let us rot in Billibotton and the other slums. No, theyre after you. What have you done?"
Dors said impatiently, "Weve done nothing and, in any case, what does it matter? If theyre not after you and they are after us, theyre going to come down here to flush us out. If you get in the way, youll be in deep trouble."
"No, not me. I have friends--powerful friends," said Davan. "I told you that last night. And they can help you as well as me. When you refused to help us openly, I got in touch with them. They know who you are, Dr. Seldon. Youre a famous man. Theyre in a position to talk to the Mayor of Dahl and see to it that you are left alone, whatever you have done. But youll have to be taken away--out of Dahl."
Seldon smiled. Relief flooded over him. He said, "You know someone powerful, do you, Davan? Someone who responds at once, who has the ability to talk the Dahl government out of taking drastic steps, and who can take us away? Good. Im not surprised." He turned to Dors, smiling. "Its Mycogen all over again. How does Hummin do it?"
But Dors shook her head. "Too quick.--I dont understand."
Seldon said, "I believe he can do anything."
"I know him better than you do--and longer--and I dont believe that."
Seldon smiled, "Dont underestimate him." And then, as though anxious not to linger longer on that subject, he turned to Davan. "But how did you find us? Raych said you knew nothing about this place."
"He dont," shrilled Raych indignantly. "This place is all mine. I found it."
"Ive never been here before," said Davan, looking about. "Its an interesting place. Raych is a corridor creature, perfectly at home in this maze."
"Yes, Davan, we gathered as much ourselves. But how did you find it?"
"A heat-seeker. I have a device that detects infra-red radiation, the particular thermal pattern that is given off at thirty-seven degrees Celsius. It will react to the presence of human beings and not to other heat sources. It reacted to you three."
Dors was frowning. "What good is that on Trantor, where there are human beings everywhere? They have them on other worlds, but--"
Davan said, "But not on Trantor. I know. Except that they are useful in the slums, in the forgotten, decaying corridors and alleyways."
"And where did you get it?" asked Seldon.
Davan said, "Its enough that I have it.--But weve got to get you away, Master Seldon. Too many people want you and I want my powerful friend to have you."
"Where is he, this powerful friend of yours?"
"Hes approaching. At least a new thirty-seven-degree source is registering and I dont see that it can be anyone else."
Through the door strode a newcomer, but Seldons glad exclamation died on his lips. It was not Chetter Hummin.
Wye
WYE-- ... A sector of the world-city of Trantor ... In the latter centuries of the Galactic Empire, Wye was the strongest and stablest portion of the world-city. Its rulers had long aspired to the Imperial throne, justifying that by their descent from early Emperors. Under Mannix IV, Wye was militarized and (Imperial authorities later claimed) was planning a planet-wide coup .
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

Chapter 82

The man who entered was tall and muscular. He had a long blond mustache that curled up at the tips and a fringe of hair that went down the sides of his face and under his chin, leaving the point of his chin and his lower lip smoothly bare and seeming a little moist. His head was so closely cropped and his hair was so light that, for one unpleasant moment, Seldon was reminded of Mycogen. The newcomer wore what was unmistakably a uniform. It was red and white and about his waist was a wide belt decorated with silver studs. His voice, when he spoke, was a rolling bass and its accent was not like any that Seldon had heard before. Most unfamiliar accents sounded uncouth in Seldons experience, but this one seemed almost musical, perhaps because of the richness of the low tones.
"I am Sergeant Emmer Thalus," he rumbled in a slow succession of syllables. "I have come seeking Dr. Hari Seldon."
Seldon said, "I am he." In an aside to Dors, he muttered, "if Hummin couldnt come himself, he certainly sent a magnificent side of beef to represent him."
The sergeant favored Seldon with a stolid and slightly prolonged look. Then he said, "Yes. You have been described to me. Please come with me, Dr. Seldon."
Seldon said, "Lead the way."
The sergeant stepped backward. Seldon and Dors Venabili stepped forward. The sergeant stopped and raised a large hand, palm toward Dors. "I have been instructed to take Dr. Hari Seldon with me. I have not been instructed to take anyone else."
For a moment, Seldon looked at him uncomprehendingly. Then his look of surprise gave way to anger. "Its quite impossible that you have been told that, Sergeant. Dr. Dors Venabili is my associate and my companion. She must come with me."
"That is not in accordance with my instructions, Doctor."
"I dont care about your instructions in any way, Sergeant Thalus. I do not budge without her."
"Whats more," said Dors with clear irritation, "my instructions are to protect Dr. Seldon at all times. I cannot do that unless I am with him. Therefore, where he goes, I go."
The sergeant looked puzzled. "My instructions are strict that I see to it that no harm comes to you, Dr. Seldon. If you will not come voluntarily, I must carry you to my vehicle. I will try to do so gently." He extended his two arms as though to seize Seldon by the waist and carry him off bodily.
Seldon skittered backward and out of reach. As he did so, the side of his right palm came down on the sergeants right upper arm where the muscles were thinnest, so that he struck the bone.
The sergeant drew a sudden deep breath and seemed to shake himself a bit, but turned, face expressionless, and advanced again. Davan, watching, remained where he was, motionless, but Raych moved behind the sergeant.
Seldon repeated his palm stroke a second time, then a third, but now Sergeant Thalus, anticipating the blow, lowered his shoulder to catch it on hard muscle. Dors had drawn her knives.
"Sergeant," she said forcefully. "Turn in this direction, I want you to understand I may be forced to hurt you severely if you persist in attempting to carry Dr. Seldon off against his will."
The sergeant paused, seemed to take in the slowly waving knives solemnly, then said, "It is not in my instructions to refrain from harming anyone but Dr. Seldon."
His right hand moved with surprising speed toward the neuronic whip in the holster at his hip. Dors moved as quickly forward, knives flashing. Neither completed the movement.
Dashing forward, Raych had pushed at the sergeants back with his left hand and withdrew the sergeants weapon from its holster with his right. He moved away quickly, holding the neuronic whip in both hands now and shouting, "Hands up, Sergeant, or youre gonna get it!"
The sergeant whirled and a nervous look crossed his reddening face. It was the only moment that its stolidity had weakened. "Put that down, sonny," he growled. "You dont know how it works."
Raych howled, "I know about the safety. Its off and this thing can fire. And it will if you try to rush me."
The sergeant froze. He clearly knew how dangerous it was to have an excited twelve-year-old handling a powerful weapon.
Nor did Seldon feel much better. He said, "Careful, Raych. Dont shoot. Keep your finger off the contact."
"I aint gonna let him rush me."
"He wont.--Sergeant, please dont move. Lets get something straight. You were told to take me away from here. Is that right?"
"Thats right," said the sergeant, eyes somewhat protruding and firmly fixed on Raych (whose eyes were as firmly fixed on the sergeant). "But you were not told to take anyone else. Is that right?"
"No, I was not, Doctor," said the sergeant firmly. Not even the threat of a neuronic whip was going to make him weasel. One could see that.
"Very well, but listen to me, Sergeant. Were you told not to take anyone else?"
"I just said--"
"No, no. Listen, Sergeant. Theres a difference. Were your instructions simply Take Dr. Seldon!? Was that the entire order, with no mention of anyone else, or were the orders more specific? Were your orders as follows: Take Dr. Seldon and dont take anyone else?"
The sergeant turned that over in his head, then he said, "I was told to take you, Dr. Seldon."
"Then there was no mention of anyone else, one way or the other, was there?"
Pause. "No."
"You were not told to take Dr. Venabili, but you were not told not to take Dr. Venabili either. Is that right?"
Pause. "Yes."
"So you can either take her or not take her, whichever you please?"
Long pause. "I suppose so."
"Now then, heres Raych, the young fellow whos got a neuronic whip pointing at you--your neuronic whip, remember--and he is anxious to use it."
"Yay!" shouted Raych.
"Not yet, Raych," said Seldon. "And here is Dr. Venabili with two knives that she can use very expertly and theres myself, who can, if I get the chance, break your Adams apple with one hand so that youll never speak above a whisper again. Now then, do you want to take Dr. Venabili or dont you want to? Your orders allow you to do either."
And finally the sergeant said in a beaten voice, "I will take the woman."
"And the boy, Raych."
"And the boy."
"Good. Have I your word of honor--your word of honor as a soldier--that you will do as you have just said ... honestly?"
"You have my word of honor as a soldier," said the sergeant.
"Good. Raych, give back the whip.--Now.--Dont make me wait."
Raych, his face twisted into an unhappy grimace, looked at Dors, who hesitated and then slowly nodded her head. Her face was as unhappy as Raychs. Raych held out the neuronic whip to the sergeant and said, "Theyre makin me, ya big--" His last words were unintelligible.
Seldon said, "Put away your knives, Dors."
Dors shook her head, but put them away.
"Now, Sergeant?" said Seldon.
The sergeant looked at the neuronic whip, then at Seldon. He said, "You are an honorable man, Dr. Seldon, and my word of honor holds." With a military snap, he placed his neuronic whip in his holster.
Seldon turned to Davan and said, "Davan, please forget what you have seen here. We three are going voluntarily with Sergeant Thalus. You tell Yugo Amaryl when you see him that I will not forget him and that, once this is over and I am free to act, I will see that he gets into a University. And if theres anything reasonable I can ever do for your cause, Davan, I will.--Now, Sergeant, lets go."

第八十二章
