The Story Behind the Foundation On August 1, 1941, when I was a lad of twenty-one, I was a graduate student in chemistry at Columbia University and had been writing science fiction professionally for three years. I was hastening to see John Campbell, editor of Astounding , to whom I had sold five stories by then. I was anxious to tell him a new idea I had for a science fiction story.

It was to write a historical novel of the future; to tell the story of the fall of the Galactic Empire. My enthusiasm must have been catching, for Campbell grew as excited as I was. He didn't want me to write a single story. He wanted a series of stories, in which the full history of the thousand years of turmoil between the fall of the First Galactic Empire and the rise of the Second Galactic Empire was to be outlined. It would all be illuminated by the science of "psychohistory" that Campbell and I thrashed out between us.

The first story appeared in the May 1942 Astounding and the second story appeared in the June 1942 issue. They were at once popular and Campbell saw to it that I wrote six more stories before the end of the decade. The stories grew longer, too. The first one was only twelve thousand words long. Two of the last three stories were fifty thousand words apiece.

By the time the decade was over, I had grown tired of the series, dropped it, and went on to other things. By then, however, various publishing houses were beginning to put out hardcover science fiction books. One such house was a small semiprofessional firm, Gnome Press. They published my Foundation series in three volumes: Foundation (1951); Foundation and Empire (1952); and Second Foundation (1953). The three books together came to be known as The Foundation Trilogy .

The books did not do very well, for Gnome Press did not have the capital with which to advertise and promote them. I got neither statements nor royalties from them.

In early 1961, my then-editor at Doubleday, Timothy Seldes, told me he had received a request from a foreign publisher to reprint the Foundation books. Since they were not Doubleday books, he passed the request on to me.

I shrugged my shoulders. "Not interested, Tim. I don't get royalties on those books."

Seldes was horrified, and instantly set about getting the rights to the books from Gnome Press (which was, by that time, moribund) and in August of that year, the books (along with I, Robot ) became Doubleday property.

From that moment on, the Foundation series took off and began to earn increasing royalties. Doubleday published the Trilogy in a single volume and distributed them through the Science Fiction Book Club. Because of that the Foundation series became enormously well-known.

In the 1966 World Science Fiction Convention, held in Cleveland, the fans were asked to vote on a category of "The Best All-Time Series." It was the first time (and, so far, the last) the category had been included in the nominations for the Hugo Award. The Foundation Trilogy won the award, which further added to the popularity of the series.

Increasingly, fans kept asking me to continue the series. I was polite but I kept refusing. Still, it fascinated me that people who had not yet been born when the series was begun had managed to become caught up in it.

Doubleday, however, took the demands far more seriously than I did. They had humored me for twenty years but as the demands kept growing in intensity and number, they finally lost patience. In 1981, they told me that I simply had to write another Foundation novel and, in order to sugar-coat the demand, offered me a contract at ten times my usual advance.

Nervously, I agreed. It had been thirty-two years since I had written a Foundation story and now I was instructed to write one 140,000 words long, twice that of any of the earlier volumes and nearly three times as long as any previous individual story. I re-read The Foundation Trilogy and, taking a deep breath, dived into the task.

The fourth book of the series, Foundation's Edge , was published in October 1982, and then a very strange thing happened. It appeared in the New York Times bestseller list at once. In fact, it stayed on that list for twenty-five weeks, much to my utter astonishment. Nothing like that had ever happened to me.

Doubleday at once signed me up to do additional novels and I wrote two that were part of another series, The Robot Novels And then it was time to return to the Foundation.

So I wrote Foundation and Earth, which begins at the very moment that Foundation's Edge ends, and that is the book you now hold. It might help if you glanced over Foundation's Edge just to refresh your memory, but you don't have to. Foundation and Earth stands by itself. I hope you enjoy it.

Isaac Asimov, New York City, 1986
Part One - Gaia Chapter I
 The Search Begins1"Why did I do it?" asked Golan Trevize.
It wasn't a new question. Since he had arrived at Gaia, he had askedit of himself frequently. He would wake up from a sound sleep in thepleasant coolness of the night and find the question sounding noiselesslyin his mind, like a tiny drumbeat: Why did I do it? Why did I do it?
Now, though, for the first time, he managed to ask it of Dom, theancient of Gaia.
Dom was well aware of Trevize's tension for he could sense the fabricof the Councilman's mind. He did not respond to it. Gaia must in no wayever touch Trevize's mind, and the best way of remaining immune to thetemptation was to painstakingly ignore what he sensed.
"Do what, Trev?" he asked. He found it difficult to use more thanone syllable in addressing a person, and it didn't matter. Trevize wasgrowing somewhat used to that.
"The decision I made," said Trevize. "Choosing Gaia as the future.""You were right to do so," said Dom, seated, his aged deep-set eyeslooking earnestly up at the man of the Foundation, who was standing.
"You say I am right," said Trevize impatiently.
"I/we/Gaia know you are. That's your worth to us. You have the capacityfor making the right decision on incomplete data, and you have made thedecision. You chose Gaia! You rejected the anarchy of a Galactic Empirebuilt on the technology of the First Foundation, as well as the anarchyof a Galactic Empire built on the mentalics of the Second Foundation. Youdecided that neither could be long stable. So you chose Gaia.""Yes," said Trevize. "Exactly! I chose Gaia, a superorganism; a wholeplanet with a mind and personality in common, so that one has to say`I/we/ Gaia' as an invented pronoun to express the inexpressible." Hepaced the floor restlessly. "And it will become eventually Galaxia,a super-superorganism embracing all the swarm of the Milky Way."He stopped, turned almost savagely on Dom, and said, "I feel I'm right,as you feel it, but you want the coming of Galaxia, and soare satisfied with the decision. There's something in me, however, thatdoesn't want it, and for that reason I'm not satisfied toaccept the rightness so easily. I want to know why I madethe decision, I want to weigh and judge the rightness and be satisfiedwith it. Merely feeling right isn't enough. How can I know I am right? What is the device that makes me right?""I/we/Gaia do not know how it is that you come to the rightdecision. Is it important to know that as long as we have thedecision?""You speak for the whole planet, do you? For the common consciousnessof every dewdrop, of every pebble, of even the liquid central core ofthe planet?""I do, and so can any portion of the planet in which the intensityof the common consciousness is great enough.""And is all this common consciousness satisfied to use me as ablack box? Since the black box works, is it unimportant to know what isinside? That doesn't suit me. I don't enjoy being a black box. Iwant to know what's inside. I want to know how and why I chose Gaia andGalaxia as the future, so that I can rest and be at peace.""But why do you dislike or distrust your decision so?"Trevize drew a deep breath and said slowly, in a low and forcefulvoice, "Because I don't want to be part of a superorganism. I don't wantto be a dispensable part to be done away with whenever the superorganismjudges that doing away would be for the good of the whole."Dom looked at Trevize thoughtfully. "Do you want to change yourdecision, then, Trev? You can, you know.""I long to change the decision, but I can't do that merely because Idislike it. To do something now, I have to know whether thedecision is wrong or right. It's not enough merely to feel it's right.""If you feel you are right, you are right." Always that slow, gentlevoice that somehow made Trevize feel wilder by its very contrast withhis own inner turmoil.
Then Trevize said, in half a whisper, breaking out of the insolubleoscillation between feeling and knowing, "I must find Earth.""Because it has something to do with this passionate need of yoursto know?""Because it is another problem that troubles me unbearably and becauseI feel there is a connection between the two. Am I not ablack box? I feel there is a connection. Isn't that enoughto make you accept it as a fact?""Perhaps," said Dom, with equanimity.
"Granted it is now thousands of years twenty thousandperhaps since the people of the Galaxy have concerned themselveswith Earth, how is it possible that we have all forgotten our planetof origin?""Twenty thousand years is a longer time than you realize. Thereare many aspects of the early Empire we know little of; many legendsthat are almost surely fictitious but that we keep repeating, and evenbelieving, because of lack of anything to substitute. And Earth is olderthan the Empire.""But surely there are some records. My good friend, Pelorat, collectsmyths and legends of early Earth; anything he can scrape up from anysource. It is his profession and, more important, his hobby. Thosemyths and legends are all there are. There are no actual records,no documents.""Documents twenty thousand years old? Things decay, perish, aredestroyed through inefficiency or war.""But there should be records of the records; copies, copies of thecopies, and copies of the copies of the copies; useful material muchyounger than twenty millennia. They have been removed. The GalacticLibrary at Trantor must have had documents concerning Earth. Thosedocuments are referred to in known historical records, but the documentsno longer exist in the Galactic Library. The references to them may exist,but any quotations from them do not exist.""Remember that Trantor was sacked a few centuries ago,""The Library was left untouched. It was protected by the personnel ofthe Second Foundation. And it was those personnel who recently discoveredthat material related to Earth no longer exists. The material wasdeliberately removed in recent times. Why?" Trevize ceased his pacingand looked intently at Dom. "If I find Earth, I will find out what itis hiding ""Hiding?""Hiding or being hidden. Once I find that out, I have the feeling Iwill know why I have chosen Gaia and Galaxia over our individuality. Then,I presume, I will know , not feel, that I am correct, andif I am correct" he lifted his shoulders hopelessly "thenso be it.""If you feel that is so," said Dom, "and if you feel you must huntfor Earth, then, of course, we will help you do as much as we can. Thathelp, however, is limited. For instance, I/we/Gaia do not know whereEarth may be located among the immense wilderness of worlds that makeup the Galaxy.""Even so," said Trevize, "I must search. Even if the endlesspowdering of stars in the Galaxy makes the quest seem hopeless, and evenif I must do it alone.
2Trevize was surrounded by the tameness of Gaia. Thetemperature, as always, was comfortable, and the air moved pleasantly,refreshing but not chilling. Clouds drifted across the sky, interruptingthe sunlight now and then, and, no doubt, if the water vapor level permeter of open land surface dropped sufficiently in this place or that,there would be enough rain to restore it.
The trees grew in regular spacings, like an orchard, and did so, nodoubt, all over the world. The land and sea were stocked with plant andanimal life in proper numbers and in the proper variety to provide anappropriate ecological balance, and all of them, no doubt, increased anddecreased in numbers in a slow sway about the recognized optimum. Asdid the number of human beings, too.
Of all the objects within the purview of Trevize's vision, the onlywild card in the deck was his ship, the Far Star .
The ship had been cleaned and refurbished efficiently and well by anumber of the human components of Gaia. It had been restocked with foodand drink, its furnishings had been renewed or replaced, its mechanicalworkings rechecked. Trevize himself had checked the ship's computercarefully.
Nor did the ship need refueling, for it was one of the fewgravitic ships of the Foundation, running on the energy of the generalgravitational field of the Galaxy, and that was enough to supply all thepossible fleets of humanity for all the eons of their likely existencewithout measurable decrease of intensity.
Three months ago, Trevize had been a Councilman of Terminus. He had,in other words, been a member of the Legislature of the Foundation and,ex officio , a great one of the Galaxy. Was it only three monthsago? It seemed it was half his thirty-two-year-old lifetime since thathad been his post and his only concern had been whether the great SeldonPlan had been valid or not; whether the smooth rise of the Foundationfrom planetary village to Galactic greatness had been properly chartedin advance, or not.
Yet in some ways, there was no change. He was still a Councilman. His status and his privileges remained unchanged, exceptthat he didn't expect he would ever return to Terminus to claim thatstatus and those privileges. He would no more fit into the huge chaosof the Foundation than into the small orderliness of Gaia. He was athome nowhere, an orphan everywhere.
His jaw tightened and he pushed his fingers angrily through his blackhair. Before he wasted time bemoaning his fate, he must find Earth. Ifhe survived the search, there would then be time enough to sit down andweep. He might have even better reason then.
With determined stolidity, then, he thought back Three months before, he and Janov Pelorat, that able, naïvescholar, had left Terminus. Pelorat had been driven by his antiquarianenthusiasms to discover the site of long-lost Earth, and Trevize had gonealong, using Pelorat's goal as a cover for what he thought his own realaim was. They did not find Earth, but they did find Gaia, and Trevizehad then found himself forced to make his fateful decision.
Now it was he, Trevize, who had turned half-circle-about-face andwas searching for Earth.
As for Pelorat, he, too, had found something he didn't expect. He hadfound the black-haired, dark-eyed Bliss, the young woman who was Gaia,even as Dom was and as the nearest grain of sand or blade of grasswas. Pelorat, with the peculiar ardor of late middle age, had fallenin love with a woman less than half his years, and the young woman,oddly enough, seemed content with that.
It was odd but Pelorat was surely happy and Trevize thoughtresignedly that each person must find happiness in his or her ownmanner. That was the point of individuality the individualitythat Trevize, by his choice, was abolishing (given time) over all theGalaxy.
The pain returned. That decision he had made, and had had to make,continued to excoriate him at every moment and was "Golan!"The voice intruded on Trevize's thoughts and he looked up in thedirection of the sun, blinking his eyes.
"Ah, Janov," he said heartily the more heartily because he didnot want Pelorat guessing at the sourness of his thoughts. He even manageda jovial, "You've managed to tear yourself away from Bliss, I see."Pelorat shook his head. The gentle breeze stirred his silky whitehair, and his long solemn face retained its length and solemnityin full. "Actually, old chap, it was she that suggested I seeyou about about what I want to discuss. Not that I wouldn'thave wanted to see you on my own, of course, but she seems to think morequickly than I do."Trevize smiled. "It's all right, Janov. You're here to say good-bye,I take it.""Well, no, not exactly. In fact, more nearly the reverse. Golan,when we left Terminus, you and I, I was intent on finding Earth. I'vespent virtually my entire adult life at that task.""And I will carry on, Janov. The task is mine now.""Yes, but it's mine, also; mine, still.""But " Trevize lifted an arm in a vague all-inclusive gestureof the world about them.
Pelorat said, in a sudden urgent gasp, "I want to go with you."Trevize felt astonished. "You can't mean that, Janov. You have Gaianow.""I'll come back to Gaia someday, but I cannot let you go alone.""Certainly you can. I can take care of myself.""No offense, Golan, but you don't know enough. It is I who know themyths and legends. I can direct you.""And you'll leave Bliss? Come, now."A faint pink colored Pelorat's cheeks. "I don't exactly want to dothat, old chap, but she said "Trevize frowned. "Is it that she's trying to get rid ofyou , Janov. She promised me ""No, you don't understand. Please listen to me, Golan. You do havethis uncomfortable explosive way of jumping to conclusions before youhear one out. It's your specialty, I know, and I seem to have a certaindifficulty in expressing myself concisely, but ""Well," said Trevize gently, "suppose you tell me exactly what it isthat Bliss has on her mind in just any way you please, and I promise tobe very patient.""Thank you, and as long as you're going to be patient, I think I cancome out with it right away. You see, Bliss wants to come, too."" Bliss wants to come?" said Trevize. "No, I'm explodingagain. I won't explode. Tell me, Janov, why would Bliss want to comealong? I'm asking it quietly.""She didn't say. She said she wants to talk to you.""Then why isn't she here, eh?"Pelorat said, "I think I say I think  thatshe is rather of the opinion that you are not fond of her, Golan, andshe rather hesitates to approach you. I have done my best, old man, toassure her that you have nothing against her. I cannot believe anyonewould think anything but highly of her. Still, she wanted me to broachthe subject with you, so to speak. May I tell her that you'll be willingto see her, Golan?""Of course, I'll see her right now.""And you'll be reasonable? You see, old man, she's rather intenseabout it. She said the matter was vital and she must gowith you.""She didn't tell you why, did she?""No, but if she thinks she must go, so must Gaia .""Which means I mustn't refuse. Is that right, Janov?""Yes, I think you mustn't, Golan."3For the first time during his brief stay on Gaia, Trevizeentered Bliss's house which now sheltered Pelorat as well.
Trevize looked about briefly. On Gaia, houses tended to be simple. Withthe all-but-complete absence of violent weather of any kind, with thetemperature mild at all times in this particular latitude, with eventhe tectonic plates slipping smoothly when they had to slip, therewas no point in building houses designed for elaborate protection,or for maintaining a comfortable environment within an uncomfortableone. The whole planet was a house, so to speak, designed to shelterits inhabitants.
Bliss's house within that planetary house was small, the windowsscreened ether than glassed, the furniture sparse and gracefullyutilitarian. There were holographic images on the walls; one of them ofPelorat looking rather astonished and self-conscious. Trevize's lipstwitched but he tried not to let his amusement show, and he fell toadjusting his waist-sash meticulously.
Bliss watched him. She wasn't smiling in her usual fashion. Rather,she looked serious, her fine dark eyes wide, her hair tumbling to hershoulders in a gentle black wave. Only her full lips, touched with red,lent a bit of color to her face.
"Thank you for coming to see me, Trev.""Janov was very urgent in his request, Blissenobiarella."Bliss smiled briefly. "Well returned. If you will call me Bliss, adecent monosyllable, I will try to say your name in full, Trevize." Shestumbled, almost unnoticeably, over the second syllable.
Trevize held up his right hand. "That would be a good arrangement. Irecognize the Gaian habit of using one-syllable name-portions in thecommon interchange of thoughts, so if you should happen to call me Trevnow and then I will not be offended. Still, I will be more comfortableif you try to say Trevize as often as you can and I shall sayBliss."Trevize studied her, as he always did when he encountered her. As anindividual, she was a young woman in her early twenties. As part of Gaia,however, she was thousands of years old. It made no difference in herappearance, but it made a difference in the way she spoke sometimes,and in the atmosphere that inevitably surrounded her. Did he want itthis way for everyone who existed? No! Surely, no, and yet Bliss said, "I will get to the point. You stressed your desire tofind Earth ""I spoke to Dom," said Trevize, determined not to give in to Gaiawithout a perpetual insistence on his own point of view.
"Yes, but in speaking to Dom, you spoke to Gaia and to every part ofit, so that you spoke to me, for instance.""Did you hear me as I spoke?""No, for I wasn't listening, but if, thereafter, I paid attention,I could remember what you said. Please accept that and let us goon. You stressed your desire to find Earth and insisted on itsimportance. I do not see that importance but you have the knack of beingright so I/we/Gaia must accept what you say. If the mission is crucialto your decision concerning Gaia, It is of crucial importance to Gaia,and so Gaia must go with you, if only to try to protect you.""When you say Gaia must go with me, you mean you mustgo with me. Am I correct?""I am Gaia," said Bliss simply.
"But so is everything else on and in this planet. Why, then, you? Whynot some other portion of Gaia?""Because Pel wishes to go with you, and if he goes with you, he wouldnot be happy with any other portion of Gaia than myself."Pelorat, who sat rather unobtrusively on a chair in another corner(with his back, Trevize noted, to his own image) said softly, "That'strue, Golan. Bliss is my portion of Gaia."Bliss smiled suddenly. "It seems rather exciting to be thought of inthat way. It's very alien, of course.""Well, let's see." Trevize put his hands behind his head and beganto lean backward in his chair. The thin legs creaked as he did so, sothat he quickly decided the chair was not sturdy enough to endure thatgame and brought it down to all four feet. "Will you still be part ofGaia if you leave her?""I need not be. I can isolate myself, for instance, if I seem in dangerof serious harm, so that harm will not necessarily spill over into Gaia,or if there is any other overriding reason for it. That, however, is amatter of emergency only. Generally, I will remain part of Gaia.""Even if we Jump through hyperspace?""Even then, though that will complicate matters somewhat.""Somehow I don't find that comforting.""Why not?"Trevize wrinkled his nose in the usual metaphoric response to a badsmell. "It means that anything that is said and done on my ship thatyou hear and see will be heard and seen by all of Gaia.""I am Gaia so what I see, hear, and sense, Gaia will see, hear,and sense.""Exactly. Even that wall will see, hear, and sense."Bliss looked at the wall he pointed to and shrugged. "Yes, that wall,too. It has only an infinitesimal consciousness so that it senses andunderstands only infinitesimally, but I presume there are some subatomicshifts in response to what we are saying right now, for instance, thatenable it to fit into Gaia with more purposeful intent for the good ofthe whole.""But what if I wish privacy? I may not want the wall to be aware ofwhat I say or do."Bliss looked exasperated and Pelorat broke in suddenly. "You know,Golan, I don't want to interfere, since I obviously don't know much aboutGaia. Still, I've been with Bliss and I've gathered somehow some of whatit's all about. If you walk through a crowd on Terminus, you seeand hear a great many things, and you may remember some of it. You mighteven be able to recall all of it under the proper cerebral stimulation,but mostly you don't care. You let it go. Even if you watch some emotionalscene between strangers and even if you're interested; still, if it'sof no great concern to you you let it go you forget. It mustbe so on Gaia, too. Even if all of Gaia knows your business intimately,that doesn't mean that Gaia necessarily cares . Isn'tthat so, Bliss dear?""I've never thought of it that way, Pel, but there is somethingin what you say. Still, this privacy Trev talks about I mean,Trevize is nothing we value at all. In fact, I/we/Gaia findit incomprehensible. To want to be not part to have your voiceunheard your deeds unwitnessed your thoughts unsensed "Bliss shook her head vigorously. "I said that we can block ourselvesoff in emergencies, but who would want to live that way,even for an hour?""I would," said Trevize. "That is why I must find Earth to findout the overriding reason, if any, that drove me to choose this dreadfulfate for humanity.""It is not a dreadful fate, but let us not debate the matter. I willbe with you, not as a spy, but as a friend and helper. Gaia will be withyou not as a spy, but as a friend and helper."Trevize said, somberly, "Gaia could help me best by directing meto Earth."Slowly, Bliss shook her head. "Gaia doesn't know the location ofEarth. Dom has already told you that.""I don't quite believe that. After all, you must have records. Whyhave I never been able to see those records during my stay here? Evenif Gaia honestly doesn't know where Earth might be located, I might gainsome knowledge from the records. I know the Galaxy in considerable detail,undoubtedly much better than Gaia does. I might be able to understand andfollow hints in your records that Gaia, perhaps, doesn't quite catch.""But what records are these you talk of, Trevize?""Any records. Books, films, recordings, holographs, artifacts, whateverit is you have. In the time I've been here I haven't seen one item thatI would consider in any way a record. Have you, Janov?""No," said Pelorat hesitantly, "but I haven't really looked.""Yet I have, in my quiet way," said Trevize, "and I've seennothing. Nothing! I can only suppose they're being hidden from me. Why,I wonder? Would you tell me that?"Bliss's smooth young forehead wrinkled into a puzzled frown. "Whydidn't you ask before this? I/we/Gaia hide nothing, and we tell nolies. An Isolate an individual in isolation might telllies. He is limited, and is fearful because he is limited. Gaia, however,is a planetary organism of great mental ability and has no fear. For Gaiato tell lies, to create descriptions that are at variance with reality,is totally unnecessary."Trevize snorted. "Then why have I carefully been kept from seeingany records? Give me a reason that makes sense.""Of course." She held out both hands, palms up before her. "We don'thave any records."4Pelorat recovered first, seeming the less astonishedof the two.
"My dear," he said gently, "that is quite impossible. You cannot havea reasonable civilization without records of some kind."Bliss raised her eyebrows. "I understand that. I merely mean wehave no records of the type that Trev Trevize is talkingabout, or was at all likely to come across. I/we/Gaia have no writings,no printings, no films, no computer data banks, nothing. We have nocarvings on stone, for that matter. That's all I'm saying. Naturally,since we have none of these, Trevize found none of these."Trevize said, "What do you have, then, if you don't have any recordsthat I would recognize as records?"Bliss said, enunciating carefully, as though she were speaking to achild. "I/we/Gaia have a memory. I remember .""What do you remember?" asked Trevize.
"Everything.""You remember all reference data?""Certainly.""For how long? For how many years back?""For indefinite lengths of time.""You could give me historical data, biographical, geographical,scientific? Even local gossip?""Everything.""All in that little head." Trevize pointed sardonically at Bliss'sright temple.
"No," she said. "Gaia's memories are not limited to the contents of myparticular skull. See here" for the moment she grew formal and evena little stern, as she ceased being Bliss solely and took on an amalgamof other units "there must have been a time before the beginningof history when human beings were so primitive that, although they couldremember events, they could not speak. Speech was invented and servedto express memories and to transfer them from person to person. Writingwas eventually invented in order to record memories and transfer themacross time from generation to generation. All technological advancesince then has served to make more room for the transfer and storageof memories and to make the recall of desired items easier. However,once individuals joined to form Gaia, all that became obsolete. We canreturn to memory, the basic system of record-keeping on which all elseis built. Do you see that?"Trevize said, "Are you saying that the sum total of all brains onGaia can remember far more data than a single brain can?""Of course.""But if Gaia has all the records spread through the planetary memory,what good is that to you as an individual portion of Gaia?""All the good you can wish. Whatever I might want to know is inan individual mind somewhere, maybe in many of them. If it is veryfundamental, such as the meaning of the word `chair,' it is in everymind. But even if it is something esoteric that is in only one smallportion of Gaia's mind, I can call it up if I need it, though such recallmay take a bit longer than if the a memory is more widespread. Look,Trevize, if you want to know some. thing that isn't in your mind, youlook at some appropriate book-film, or make use of a computer's databanks. I scan Gaia's total mind."Trevize said, "How do you keep all that information from pouring intoyour mind and bursting your cranium?""Are you indulging in sarcasm, Trevize?"Pelorat said, "Come, Golan, don't be unpleasant." ,Trevize looked from one to the other and, with a visible effort,allowed tightness about his face to relax. "I'm sorry. I'm borne downby a responsibility I don't want and don't know how to get rid of. Thatmay make me sound unpleasant when I don't intend to be. Bliss, I reallywish to know. How do you draw upon the contents of the brains of otherswithout then storing it in your own brain and quickly overloading itscapacity?"Bliss said, "I don't know, Trevize; any more than you know the detailedworkings of your single brain. I presume you know the distance from yoursun to a neighboring star, but you are not always conscious of it. Youstore it somewhere and can retrieve the figure at any time if asked. Ifnot asked, you may with time forget it, but you can then always retrieveit from some data bank. If you consider Gaia's brain a vast data bank, itis one I can call on, but there is no need for me to remember consciouslyany particular item I have made use of. Once I have made use of a factor memory, I can allow it to pass out of memory. For that matter, I candeliberately put it back, so to speak, in the place I got it from.""How many people on Gaia, Bliss? How many human beings?""About a billion. Do you want the exact figure as of now?"Trevize smiled ruefully. "I quite see you can call up the exact figureif you wish, but I'll take the approximation.""Actually," said Bliss, "the population is stable and oscillates abouta particular number that is slightly in excess of a billion. I can tellby how much the number exceeds or falls short of the mean by extending myconsciousness and well feeling the boundaries. I can't explainit better than that to some one who has never shared the experience.""It seems to me, however, that a billion human minds a numberof them being those of children are surely not enough to hold inmemory all the data needed by a complex society.""But human beings are not the only living things on Gaia, Trev.""Do you mean that animals remember, too?""Nonhuman brains can't store memories with the same density humanbrains can, and much of the room in all brains, human and nonhuman alike,must be given over to personal memories which are scarcely useful exceptto the particular component of the planetary consciousness that harborsthem. However, significant quantities of advanced data can be, andare, stored in animal brains, also in plant tissue, and in the mineralstructure of the planet.""In the mineral structure? The rocks and mountain range, you mean?""And, for some kinds of data, the ocean and atmosphere. All that isGaia, too.""But what can nonliving systems hold?""A great deal. The intensity is low but the volume is so great thata large majority of Gaia's total memory is in its rocks. It takes alittle longer to retrieve and replace rock memories so that it is thepreferred place for storing dead data, so to speak items that,in the normal course of events, would rarely be called upon.""What happens when someone dies whose brain stores data of considerablevalue?""The data is not lost. It is slowly crowded out as the braindisorganizes after death, but there is ample time to distribute thememories into other parts of Gaia. And as new brains appear in babiesand become more organized with growth, they not only develop theirpersonal memories and thoughts but are fed appropriate knowledge fromother sources. What you would call education is entirely automatic withme/us/Gaia."Pelorat said, "Frankly, Golan, it seems to me that this notion of aliving world has a great deal to be said for it."Trevize gave his fellow-Foundationer a brief, sidelong glance. "I'msure of that, Janov, but I'm not impressed. The planet, however bigand however diverse, represents one brain. One! Every new brain thatarises is melted into the whole. Where's the opportunity for opposition,for disagreement? When you think of human history, you think of theoccasional human being whose minority view may be condemned by societybut who wins out in the end and changes the world. What chance is thereon Gaia for the great rebels of history?""There is internal conflict," said Bliss. "Not every aspect of Gaianecessarily accepts the common view.""It must be limited," said Trevize. "You cannot have too much turmoilwithin a single organism, or it would not work properly. If progress anddevelopment are not stopped altogether, they must certainly be slowed. Canwe take the chance of inflicting that on the entire Galaxy? On all ofhumanity?"Bliss said, without open emotion, "Are you now questioning your owndecision? Are you changing your mind and are you now saying that Gaiais an undesirable future for humanity?"Trevize tightened his lips and hesitated. Then, he said, slowly,"I would like to, but not yet. I made my decision on somebasis some unconscious basis and until I find out what thatbasis was, I cannot truly decide whether I am to maintain or change mydecision. Let us therefore return to the matter of Earth.""Where you feel you will learn the nature of the basis on which youmade your decision. Is that it, Trevize?""That is the feeling I have. Now Dom says Gaia does not knowthe location of Earth. And you agree with him, I believe.""Of course I agree with him. I am no less Gaia than he is.""And do you withhold knowledge from me? Consciously, I mean?""Of course not. Even if it were possible for Gaia to lie, it wouldnot lie to you. Above all, we depend upon your conclusions, and we needthem to be accurate, and that requires that they be based on reality.""In that case," said Trevize, "let's make use of yourworld-memory. Probe backward and tell me how far you can remember."There was a small hesitation. Bliss looked blankly at Trevize,as though, for a moment, she was in a trance. Then she said, "Fifteenthousand years.""Why did you hesitate?""It took time. Old memories really old are almost all inthe mountain roots where it takes time to dig them out.""Fifteen thousand years ago, then? Is that when Gaia was settled?""No, to the best of our knowledge that took place some three thousandyears before that.""Why are you uncertain? Don't you or Gaia remember?"Bliss said, "That was before Gaia had developed to the point wherememory became a global phenomenon.""Yet before you could rely on your collective memory, Gaia must havekept records, Bliss. Records in the usual sense recorded, written,filmed, and so on.""I imagine so, but they could scarcely endure all this time.""They could have been copied or, better yet, transferred into theglobal memory, once that was developed."Bliss frowned. There was another hesitation, longer this time. "Ifind no sign of these earlier records you speak of.""Why is that?""I don't know, Trevize. I presume that they proved of no greatimportance. I imagine that by the time it was understood that the earlynon-memory records were decaying, it was decided that they had grownarchaic and were not needed.""You don't know that. You presume and you imagine, but you don't knowthat. Gaia doesn't know that."Bliss's eyes fell. "It must be so.""Must be? I am not a part of Gaia and therefore I need not presumewhat Gaia presumes which gives you an example of the importanceof isolation. I, as an Isolate, presume something else.""What do you presume?""First, there is something I am sure of. A civilization in being isnot likely to destroy its early records. Far from judging them to bearchaic and unnecessary, they are likely to treat them with exaggeratedreverence and would labor to preserve them. If Gaia's pre-globalrecords were destroyed, Bliss, that destruction is not likely to havebeen voluntary.""How would you explain it, then?""In the Library at Trantor, all references to Earth were removedby someone or some force other than that of the Trantorian SecondFoundationers themselves. Isn't it possible, then, that on Gaia, too, allreferences to Earth were removed by something other than Gaia itself?""How do you know the early records involved Earth?""According to you, Gaia was founded at least eighteen thousand yearsago. That brings us back to the period before the establishment of theGalactic Empire, to the period when the Galaxy was being settled andthe prime source of settlers was Earth. Pelorat will confirm that."Pelorat, caught a little by surprise by suddenly being called on,cleared his throat. "So go the legends, my dear. I take those legendsseriously and I think, as Golan Trevize does, that the human species wasoriginally confined to a single planet and that planet was Earth. Theearliest Settlers came from Earth.""If, then," said Trevize, "Gaia was founded in the early days ofhyperspatial travel, then it is very likely to have been colonizedby Earthmen, or possibly by natives of a not very old world thathad not long before been colonized by Earthmen. For that reason, therecords of Gaia's settlement and of the first few millennia thereaftermust clearly have involved Earth and Earthmen and those records aregone. Something seems to be seeing to it that Earth is notmentioned anywhere in the records of the Galaxy. And if so, there mustbe some reason for it."Bliss said indignantly, "This is conjecture, Trevize. You have noevidence for this.""But it is Gaia that insists that my special talent is that of comingto correct conclusions on the basis of insufficient evidence. If, then,I come to a firm conclusion, don't tell me I lack evidence."Bliss was silent.
Trevize went on, "All the more reason then for finding Earth. I intendto leave as soon as the Far Star is ready. Do you two still wantto come?""Yes," said Bliss at once, and "Yes," said Pelorat.


Chapter 2: Toward Comporellon
5It was raining lightly. Trevize looked up at the sky, which was asolid grayish white.
He was wearing a rain hat that repelled the drops and sent themflying well away from his body in all directions. Pelorat, standing outof range of the flying drops, had no such protection.
Trevize said, "I don't see the point of your letting yourself getwet, Janov.""The wet doesn't bother me, my dear chap," said Pelorat, looking assolemn as he always did. "It's a light and warm rain. There's no windto speak of. And besides, to quote the old saying: `In Anacreon, do asthe Anacreonians do.'" He indicated the few Gaians standing near theFar Star , watching quietly. They were well scattered, as thoughthey were trees in a Gaian grove, and none wore rain hats.
"I suppose," said Trevize, "they don't mind being wet, because allthe rest of Gaia is getting wet. The trees the grass thesoil all wet, and all equally part of Gaia, along with theGaians.""I think it makes sense," said Pelorat. "The sun will come out soonenough and everything will dry quickly. The clothing won't wrinkleor shrink, there's no chilling effect, and, since there aren't anyunnecessary pathogenic microorganisms, no one will get colds, or flu,or pneumonia. Why worry about a bit of damp then?"Trevize had no trouble in seeing the logic of that, but he hated tolet go of his grievance. He said, "Still, there is no need for it to rainas we are leaving. After all, the rain is voluntary. Gaia wouldn't rainif it didn't want to. It's almost as though it were showing its contemptfor us.""Perhaps" and Pelorat's lip twitched a bit "Gaia isweeping with sorrow at our leaving."Trevize said, "That may be, but I'm not.""Actually," Pelorat went on, "I presume that the soil in this regionneeds a wetting down, and that need is more important than your desireto have the sun shine."Trevize smiled. "I suspect you really like this world, don't you? Evenaside from Bliss, I mean.""Yes, I do," said Pelorat, a trace defensively. "I've always led aquiet, orderly life, and think how I could manage here, with a wholeworld laboring to keep it quiet and orderly. After all, Golan,when we build a house or that ship we try to create aperfect shelter. We equip it with everything we need; we arrange tohave its temperature, air quality, illumination, and everything else ofimportance, controlled by us and manipulated in a way to make it perfectlyaccommodating to us. Gaia is just an extension of the desire for comfortand security extended to an entire planet. What's wrong with that?""What's wrong with that," said Trevize, "is that my house or myship is engineered to suit me . I am not engineered to suitit . If I were part of Gaia, then no matter how ideally theplanet was devised to suit me, I would be greatly disturbed over thefact that I was also being devised to suit it."Pelorat pursed his lips. "One could argue that every society moldsits population to fit itself. Customs develop that make sense withinthe society, and that chain every individual firmly to its needs.""In the societies I know, one can revolt. There are eccentrics,even criminals.""Do you want eccentrics and criminals?""Why not? You and I are eccentrics. We're certainly not typicalof the people living on Terminus. As for criminals, that's a matterof definition. And if criminals are the price we must pay for rebels,heretics, and geniuses, I'm willing to pay it. I demandthe price be paid.""Are criminals the only possible payment? Can't you have geniuswithout criminals?""You can't have geniuses and saints without having people far outsidethe norm, and I don't see how you can have such things on only one sideof the norm. There is bound to be a certain symmetry. In any case,I want a better reason for my decision to make Gaia the model for thefuture of humanity than that it is a planetary version of a comfortablehouse.""Oh, my dear fellow. I wasn't trying to argue you into being satisfiedwith your decision. I was just making an observa "He broke off. Bliss was striding toward them, her dark hair wet andher robe clinging to her body and emphasizing the rather generous widthof her hips. She was nodding to them as she came.
"I'm sorry I delayed you," she said, panting a little. "It took longerto check with Dom than I had anticipated.""Surely," said Trevize, "you know everything he knows.""Sometimes it's a matter of a difference in interpretation. We arenot identical, after all, so we discuss. Look here," she said, witha touch of asperity, "you have two hands. They are each part of you,and they seem identical except for one being the mirror-image of theother. Yet you do not use them entirely alike, do you? There are somethings you do with your right hand most of the time, and some with yourleft. Differences in interpretation, so to speak.""She's got you," said Pelorat, with obvious satisfaction.
Trevize nodded. "It's an effective analogy, if it were relevant,and I'm not at all sure it is. In any case, does this mean we can boardthe ship now? It is raining.""Yes, yes. Our people are all off it, and it's in perfect shape." Then,with a sudden curious look at Trevize, "You're keeping dry. The raindropsare missing you.""Yes, indeed," said Trevize. "I am avoiding wetness.""But doesn't it feel good to be wet now and then?""Absolutely. But at my choice, not the rain's."Bliss shrugged. "Well, as you please. All our baggage is loaded solet's board."The three walked toward the Far Star . The rain was growingstill lighter, but the grass was quite wet. Trevize found himselfwalking gingerly, but Bliss had kicked off her slippers, which she wasnow carrying in one hand, and was slogging through the grass barefoot.
"It feels delightful," she said, in response to Trevize's downwardglance.
"Good," he said absently. Then, with a touch of irritation, "Why arethose other Gaians standing about, anyway?"Bliss said, "They're recording this event, which Gaia findsmomentous. You are important to us, Trevize. Consider that if you shouldchange your mind as a result of this trip and decide against us, wewould never grow into Galaxia, or even remain as Gaia.""Then I represent life and death for Gaia; for the whole world.""We believe so."Trevize stopped suddenly, and took off his rain hat. Blue patcheswere appearing in the sky. He said, "But you have my vote in your favornow . If you kill me, I'll never be able to change it.""Golan," murmured Pelorat, shocked. "That is a terrible thing tosay.""Typical of an Isolate," said Bliss calmly. "You must understand,Trevize, that we are not interested in you as a person, or even inyour vote, but in the truth, in the facts of the matter. You are onlyimportant as a conduit to the truth, and your vote as an indication of thetruth. That is what we want from you, and if we kill you to avoid a changein your vote, we would merely be hiding the truth from ourselves.""If I tell you the truth is non-Gaia, will you all then cheerfullyagree to die?""Not entirely cheerfully, perhaps, but it's what it would amount toin the end."Trevize shook his head. "If anything ought to convince me that Gaiais a horror and should die, it might be that very statementyou've just made." Then he said, his eyes returning to the patientlywatching (and, presumably, listening) Gaians, "Why are they spread outlike that? And why do you need so many? If one of them observes thisevent and stores it in his or her memory, isn't it available to all therest of the planet? Can't it be stored in a million different places ifyou want it to be?"Bliss said, "They are observing this each from a different angle,and each is storing it in a slightly different brain. When all theobservations are studied, it will be seen that what is taking place willbe far better understood from all the observations together than fromany one of them, taken singly.""The whole is greater than the sum of the parts, in other words.""Exactly. You have grasped the basic justification of Gaia'sexistence. You, as a human individual, are composed of perhaps fiftytrillion cells, but you, as a multicellular individual, are far moreimportant than those fifty trillion as the sum of their individualimportance. Surely you would agree with that.""Yes," said Trevize. "I agree with that."He stepped into the ship, and turned briefly for one more look atGaia. The brief rain had lent a new freshness to the atmosphere. He sawa green, lush, quiet, peaceful world; a garden of serenity set amid theturbulence of the weary Galaxy.
 And Trevize earnestly hoped he would never see it again.
6When the airlock closed behind them, Trevize feltas though he had shut out not exactly a nightmare, but something soseriously abnormal that it had prevented him from breathing freely.
He was fully aware that an element of that abnormality was still withhim in the person of Bliss. While she was there, Gaia was there andyet he was also convinced that her presence was essential. It was theblack box working again, and earnestly he hoped he would never beginbelieving in that black box too much.
He looked about the vessel and found it beautiful. It had been hisonly since Mayor Harla Branno of the Foundation had forced him into itand sent him out among the stars a living lightning rod designed todraw the fire of those she considered enemies of the Foundation. That taskwas done but the ship was still his, and he had no plans to return it.
It had been his for merely a matter of a few months, but it seemedlike home to him and he could only dimly remember what had once beenhis home in Terminus.
Terminus! The off-center hub of the Foundation, destined, by Seldon'sPlan, to form a second and greater Empire in the course of the next fivecenturies, except that he, Trevize, had now derailed it. By his owndecision he was converting the Foundation to nothing, and was makingpossible instead, a new society, a new scheme of life, a frighteningrevolution that would be greater than any since the development ofmulticellular life.
Now he was engaged in a journey designed to prove to himself (or todisprove) that what he had done was right.
He found himself lost in thought and motionless, so that he shookhimself in self-irritation. He hastened to the pilot-room and foundhis computer still there.
It glistened; everything glistened. There had been a most carefulcleaning. The contacts he closed, nearly at random, worked perfectly,and, it surely seemed, with greater ease than ever. The ventilatingsystem was so noiseless that he had to put his hand over the vents tomake sure he felt air currents.
The circle of light on the computer glowed invitingly. Trevize touchedit and the light spread out to cover the desk top and the outline of aright and left hand appeared on it. He drew a deep breath and realizedthat he had stopped breathing for a while. The Gaians knew nothing aboutFoundation technology and they might easily have damaged the computerwithout meaning any malice. Thus far they had not the hands werestill there.
The crucial test came with the laying on of his own hands, however,and, for a moment, he hesitated. He would know, almost at once, ifanything were wrong but if something was, what could he do? Forrepairs, he would have to go back to Terminus, and if he did, he feltquite confident that Mayor Branno would not let him leave again. And ifhe did not He could feel his heart pounding, and there was clearly no point indeliberately lengthening the suspense.
He thrust his hands out, right, left, and placed them on the outlinesupon the desk. At once, he had the illusion of another pair of handsholding his. His senses extended, and he could see Gaia in all directions,green and moist, the Gaians still watching. When he willed himself tolook upward, he saw a largely cloudy sky. Again, at his will, the cloudsvanished and he looked at an unbroken blue sky with the orb of Gaia'ssun filtered out.
Again he willed and the blue parted and he saw the stars.
He wiped them out, and willed and saw the Galaxy, like a foreshortenedpinwheel. He tested the computerized image, adjusting its orientation,altering the apparent progress of time, making it spin first in onedirection, then the other. He located the sun of Sayshell, the nearestimportant star to Gaia; then the sun of Terminus; then of Trantor; oneafter the other. He traveled from star to star in the Galactic map thatdwelt in the bowels of the computer.
Then he withdrew his hands and let the world of reality surround himagain and realized he had been standing all this time, half-bowingover the computer to make the hand contact. He felt stiff and had tostretch his back muscles before sitting down.
He stared at the computer with warm relief. It had worked perfectly. Ithad been, if anything, more responsive, and what he felt for it he couldonly describe as love. After all, while heeeeld its hands (he resolutelyrefused to admit to himself that he thought of it as her hands) they were part of each other, and his will directed, controlled,experienced, and was part of a greater self. He and it must feel, in asmall way (he suddenly, and disturbingly, thought), what Gaia did in amuch larger way.
He shook his head. No! In the case of the computer and himself, itwas he Trevize who was in entire control. The computer wasa thing of total submission.
He rose and moved out to the compact galley and dining area. There wasplenty of food of all kinds, with proper refrigeration and easy-heatingfacilities. He had already noted that the book-films in his room werein the proper order, and he was reasonably sure no, completelysure that Pelorat had his personal library in safe storage. Hewould otherwise surely have heard from him by now.
Pelorat! That reminded him. He stepped into Pelorat's room. "Is thereroom for Bliss here, Janov?""Oh yes, quite.""I can convert the common room into her bedroom."Bliss looked up, wide-eyed. "I have no desire for a separate bedroom. Iam quite content to stay here with Pel. I suppose, though, that I mayuse the other rooms when needed. The gym, for instance.""Certainly. Any room but mine.""Good. That's what I would have suggested be the arrangement, if Ihad had the making of it. Naturally, you will stay out of ours.""Naturally," said Trevize, looking down and realizing that his shoesoverlapped the threshold. He took a half-step backward and said grimly,"These are not honeymoon quarters, Bliss.""I should say, in view of its compactness, that it is exactly thateven though Gaia extended it to half again as wide as it was."Trevize tried not to smile. "You'll have to be very friendly.""We are," said Pelorat, clearly ill at ease at the topic ofconversation, "but really, old chap, you can leave it to us to make ourown arrangements.""Actually, I can't," said Trevize slowly. "I still want to make itclear that these are not honeymoon accommodations. I have no objectionto anything you do by mutual consent, but you must realize that you willhave no privacy. I hope you understand that, Bliss.""There is a door," said Bliss, "and I imagine you will not disturbus who it is locked short of a real emergency, that is.""Of course I won't. However, there is no soundproofing.""What you are trying to say, Trevize," said Bliss, "is that you willhear, quite clearly, any conversation we may have, and any sounds wemay make in the course of sex.""Yes, that is what I am trying to say. With that in mind, I expect youmay find you will have to limit your activities here. This may discommodeyou, and I'm sorry, but that's the situation as it is."Pelorat cleared his throat, and said gently, "Actually, Golan, this isa problem I've already had to face. You realize that any sensation Blissexperiences, when together with me, is experienced by all of Gaia.""I have thought of that, Janov," said Trevize, looking as though hewere repressing a wince. "I didn't intend to mention it just in casethe thought had not occurred to you.""But it did, I'm afraid," said Pelorat.
Bliss said, "Don't make too much of that, Trevize. At any given moment,there may be thousands of human beings on Gaia who are engaged in sex;millions who are eating, drinking, or engaged in other pleasure-givingactivities. This gives rise to a general aura of delight that Gaia feels,every part of it. The lower animals, the plants, the minerals have theirprogressively milder pleasures that also contribute to a generalizedjoy of consciousness that Gaia feels in all its parts always, and thatis unfelt in any other world.""We have our own particular joys," said Trevize, "which we can shareafter a fashion, if we wish; or keep private, if we wish.""If you could feel ours, you would know how poverty-stricken youIsolates are in that respect.""How can you know what we feel?""Without knowing how you feel, it is still reasonable to suppose thata world of common pleasures must be more intense than those availableto a single isolated individual.""Perhaps, but even if my pleasures were poverty-stricken, I would keepmy own joys and sorrows and be satisfied with them, thin as they are,and be me and not blood brother to the nearest rock.""Don't sneer," said Bliss. "You value every mineral crystal in yourbones and teeth and would not have one of them damaged, though they haveno more consciousness than the average rock crystal of the same size.""That's true enough," said Trevize reluctantly, "but we've managed toget off the subject. I don't care if all Gaia shares your joy, Bliss, butI don't want to share it. We're living here in close quarters and I do notwish to be forced to participate in your activities even indirectly."Pelorat said, "This is an argument over nothing, my dear chap. Iam no more anxious than you to have your privacy violated. Nor mine,for that matter. Bliss and I will be discreet; won't we, Bliss?""It will be as you wish, Pel.""After all," said Pelorat, "we are quite likely to be planet-boundfor considerably longer periods than we will space-borne, and on planets,the opportunities for true privacy ""I don't care what you do on planets," interrupted Trevize, "but onthis ship, I am master.""Exactly," said Pelorat.
"Then, with that straightened out, it is time to take off.""But wait." Pelorat reached out to tug at Trevize's sleeve. "Take offfor where? You don't know where Earth is, nor do I, nor does Bliss. Nordoes your computer, for you told me long ago that it lacks any informationon Earth. What do you intend doing, then? You can't simply drift throughspace at random, my dear chap."At that, Trevize smiled with what was almost joy. For the firsttime since he had fallen into the grip of Gaia, he felt master of hisown fate.
"I assure you," he said, "that it is not my intention to drift,Janov. I know exactly where I am going."7Pelorat walked quietly into the pilot-room afterhe had waited long moments while his small tap on the door had goneunanswered. He found Trevize looking with keen absorption at thestarfield.
Pelorat said, "Golan " and waited.
Trevize looked up. "Janov! Sit down. Where's Bliss?""Sleeping. We're out in space, I see.""You see correctly." Trevize was not surprised at the other's mildsurprise. In the new gravitic ships, there was simply no way of detectingtakeoff. There were no inertial effects; no accelerational push; no noise;no vibration.
Possessing the capacity to insulate itself from outside gravitationalfields to any degree up to total, the Far Star lifted from aplanetary surface as though it were floating on some cosmic sea. Andwhile it did so, the gravitational effect within the ship,paradoxically, remained normal.
While the ship was within the atmosphere, of course, there was no needto accelerate so that the whine and vibration of rapidly passing air wouldbe absent. As the atmosphere was left behind, however, acceleration couldtake place, and at rapid rates, without affecting the passengers.
It was the ultimate in comfort and Trevize did not see how it couldbe improved upon until such time as human beings discovered a way ofwhisking through hyperspace without ships, and without concern aboutnearby gravitational fields that might be too intense. Right now, theFar Star would have to speed away from Gaia's sun for severaldays before the gravitational intensity was weak enough to attemptthe Jump.
"Golan, my dear fellow," said Pelorat. "May I speak with you for amoment or two? You are not too busy?""Not at all busy. The computer handles everything once I instruct itproperly. And sometimes it seems to guess what my instructions will be,and satisfies them almost before I can articulate them." Trevize brushedthe top of the desk lovingly.
Pelorat said, "We've grown very friendly, Golan, in the short timewe've known each other, although I must admit that it scarcely seemsa short time to me. So much has happened. It's really peculiar when Istop to think of my moderately long life, that half of all the events Ihave experienced were squeezed into the last few months. Or so it wouldseem. I could almost suppose "Trevize held up a hand "Janov, you're spinning outward from youroriginal point, I'm sure. You began by saying we've grown very friendly ina very short time. Yes, we have, and we still are. For that matter, you'veknown Bliss an even shorter time and have grown even friendlier.""That's different, of course," said Pelorat, clearing his throat insome embarrassment.
"Of course," said Trevize, "but what follows from our brief butenduring friendship?""If, my dear fellow, we still are friends, as you've just said, thenI must pass on to Bliss, whom, as you've also just said, is peculiarlydear to me.""I understand. And what of that?""I know, Golan, that you are not fond of Bliss, but for my sake,I wish "Trevize raised a hand. "One moment, Janov. I am not overwhelmed byBliss, but neither is she an object of hatred to me. Actually, I haveno animosity toward her at all. She's an attractive young woman and,even if she weren't, then, for your sake, I would be prepared to findher so. It's Gaia I dislike.""But Bliss is Gaia.""I know, Janov. That's what complicates things so. As long as I thinkof Bliss as a person, there's no problem. If I think of her as Gaia,there is.""But you haven't given Gaia a chance, Golan. Look, old chap,let me admit something. When Bliss and I are intimate, she sometimes letsme share her mind for a minute or so. Not for more than that becauseshe says I'm too old to adapt to it. Oh, don't grin, Golan, youwould be too old for it, too. If an Isolate, such as you or I, wereto remain part of Gaia for more, than a minute or two, there might bebrain damage and if it's as much as five or ten minutes, it would beirreversible. If you could only experience it, Golan.""What? Irreversible brain damage? No, thanks.""Golan, you're deliberately misunderstanding me. I mean, justthat small moment of union. You don't know what you're missing. It'sindescribable. Bliss rays there's a sense of joy. That's like sayingthere's a sense of joy when you finally drink a bit of water after youhave all but died of thirst. I couldn't even begin to tell you whatit's like. You share all the pleasures that a billion people separatelyexperience. It isn't a steady joy; if it were you would quickly stopfeeling it. It vibrates twinkles has a strange pulsing rhythmthat doesn't let you go. It's more joy no, not more it'sa better joy than you could ever experience separately. Icould weep when she shuts the door on me "Trevize shook his head. "You are amazingly eloquent, my good friend,but you sound very much as though you're describing pseudendorphinaddiction, or that of some other drug that admits you to joy in theshort term at the price of leaving you permanently in horror in the longterm. Not for me! I am reluctant to sell my individuality for some brieffeeling of joy.""I still have my individuality, Golan.""But for how long will you have it if you keep it up, Janov? You'llbeg for more and more of your drug until, eventually, your brain willbe damaged. Janov, you mustn't let Bliss do this to you. PerhapsI had better speak to her about it.""No! Don't! You're not the soul of tact, you know, and I don't wanther hurt. I assure you she takes better care of me in that respect thanyou can imagine. She's more concerned with the possibility of braindamage than I am. You can be sure of that.""Well, then, I'll speak to you. Janov, don't do this anymore. You'velived for fifty-two years with your own kind of pleasure and joy,and your brain is adapted to withstanding that. Don't be snapped up bya new and unusual vice. There is a price for it; if not immediately,then eventually.""Yes, Golan," said Pelorat in a low voice, looking down at the tipsof his shoes. Then he said, "Suppose you look at it this way. What ifyou were a one-celled creature ""I know what you're going to say, Janov. Forget it. Bliss and I havealready referred to that analogy.""Yes, but think a moment. Suppose we imagine single-celled organismswith a human level of consciousness and with the power of thought andimagine them faced with the possibility of becoming a multicellularorganism. Would not the single-celled organisms mourn their lossof individuality, and bitterly resent their forthcoming enforcedregimentation into the personality of an overall organism? And wouldthey not be wrong? Could an individual cell even imagine the power ofthe human brain?"Trevize shook his head violently. "No, Janov, it's a falseanalogy. Single-celled organisms don't have consciousnessor any power of thought or if they do it is so infinitesimalit might as well be considered zero. For such objects to combine andlose individuality is to lose something they have never really had. Ahuman being, however, is conscious and does have the power of thought. He has an actual consciousness and an actualindependent intelligence to lose, so the analogy fails."There was silence between the two of them for a moment; an almostoppressive silence; and finally Pelorat, attempting to wrench theconversation in a new direction, said, "Why do you stare at theviewscreen?""Habit," said Trevize, smiling wryly. "The computer tells me thatthere are no Gaian ships following me and that there are no Sayshellianfleets coming to meet me. Still I look anxiously, comforted by my ownfailure to see such ships, when the computer's sensors are hundreds oftimes keener and more piercing than my eyes. What's more, the computer iscapable of sensing some properties of space very delicately, propertiesthat my senses can't perceive under any conditions. Knowing allthat, I still stare."Pelorat said, "Golan, if we are indeed friends ""I promise you I will do nothing to grieve Bliss; at least, nothingI can help.""It's another matter now. You keep your destination from me, as thoughyou don't trust me with it. Where are we going? Are you of the opinionyou know where Earth is?"Trevize looked up, eyebrows lifted. "I'm sorry. I have been huggingthe secret to my own bosom, haven't I?""Yes, but why?"Trevize said, "Why, indeed. I wonder, my friend, if it isn't a matterof Bliss.""Bliss? Is it that you don't want her to know. Really,old fellow, she is completely to be trusted.""It's not that. What's the use of not trusting her? I suspect shecan tweak any secret out of my mind if she wishes to. I think I have amore childish reason than that. I have the feeling that you are payingattention only to her and that I no longer really exist."Pelorat looked horrified. "But that's not true, Golan.""I know, but I'm trying to analyze my own feelings. You came to mejust now with fears for our friendship, and thinking about it, I feel asthough I've had the same fears. I haven't openly admitted it to myself,but I think I have felt cut out by Bliss. Perhaps I seek to `get even'
by petulantly keeping things from you. Childish, I suppose.""Golan!""I said it was childish, didn't I? But where is the person who isn'tchildish now and then? However, we are friends. We'vesettled that and therefore I will play no further games. We're goingto Comporellon.""Comporellon?" said Pelorat, for the moment not remembering.
"Surely you recall my friend, the traitor, Munn Li Compor. We threemet on Sayshell."Pelorat's face assumed a visible expression of enlightenment. "Ofcourse I remember. Comporellon was the world of his ancestors."" If it was. I don't necessarily believe anythingCompor said. But Comporellon is a known world, and Compor said that itsinhabitants knew of Earth. Well, then, we'll go there and find out. Itmay lead to nothing but it's the only starting point we have."Pelorat cleared his throat and looked dubious. "Oh, my dear fellow,are you sure?""There's nothing about which to be either sure or not sure. We haveone starting point and, however feeble it might be, we have no choicebut to follow it up.""Yes, but if we're doing it on the basis of what Compor told us,then perhaps we ought to consider everything he told us. Iseem to remember that he told us, most emphatically, that Earth didnot exist as a living planet that its surface was radioactive andthat it was utterly lifeless. And if that is so, then we are going toComporellon for nothing."8The three were lunching in the dining room, virtuallyfilling it as they did so.
"This is very good," said Pelorat, with considerable satisfaction. "Isthis part of our original Terminus supply?""No, not at all," said Trevize. "That's long gone. This is partof the supplies we bought on Sayshell, before we headed out towardGaia. Unusual, isn't it? Some sort of seafood, but rather crunchy. Asfor this stuff I was under the impression it was cabbage when Ibought it, but it doesn't taste anything like it."Bliss listened but said nothing. She picked at the food on her ownplate gingerly.
Pelorat said gently, "You've got to eat, dear.""I know, Pel, and I'm eating."Trevize said, with a touch of impatience he couldn't quite suppress,"We do have Gaian food, Bliss.""I know," said Bliss, "but I would rather conserve that. We don'tknow how long we will be out in space and eventually I must learn toeat Isolate food. ""Is that so bad? Or must Gaia eat only Gaia."Bliss sighed. "Actually, there's a saying of ours that goes: `WhenGaia eats Gaia, there is neither loss nor gain.' It is no more than atransfer of consciousness up and down the scale. Whatever I eat on Gaiais Gaia and when much of it is metabolized and becomes me, itis still Gaia. In fact, by the fact that I eat, some of whatI eat has a chance to participate in a higher intensity of consciousness,while, of course, other portions of it are turned into waste of one sortor another and therefore sink in the scale of consciousness."She took a firm bite of her food, chewed vigorously for a moment,swallowed, and said, "It represents a vast circulation. Plants growand are eaten by animals. Animals eat and are eaten. Any organismthat dies is incorporated into the cells of molds, decay bacteria,and so on still Gaia. In this vast circulation of consciousness,even inorganic matter participates, and everything in the circulationhas its chance of periodically participating in a high intensity ofconsciousness.""All this," said Trevize, "can be said of any world. Every atom inme has a long history during which it may have been part of many livingthings, including human beings, and during which it may also have spentlong periods as part of the sea, or in a lump of coal, or in a rock,or as a portion of the wind blowing upon us.""On Gaia, however," said Bliss, "all atoms are also continually partof a higher planetary consciousness of which you know nothing.""Well, what happens, then," said Trevize, "to these vegetables fromSayshell that you are eating? Do they become part of Gaia?""They do rather slowly. And the wastes I excrete as slowly ceasebeing part of Gaia. After all, what leaves me is altogether lacking incontact with Gaia. It lacks even the less-direct hyperspatial contactthat I can maintain, thanks to my high level of conscious intensity. Itis this hyperspatial contact that causes non-Gaian food to become partof Gaia slowly once I eat it.""What about the Gaian food in our stores? Will that slowly becomenon-Gaian? If so, you had better eat it while you can.""There is no need to be concerned about that," said Bliss. "Our Gaianstores have been treated in such a way that they will remain part ofGaia over a long interval."Pelorat said, suddenly, "But what will happen when we eat the Gaian food. For that matter, what happened to us when we ateGaian food on Gaia itself. Are we ourselves slowly turning into Gaia?"Bliss shook her head and a peculiarly disturbed expression crossed herface. "No, what you ate was lost to us. Or at least the portions thatwere metabolized into your tissues were lost to us. What you excretedstayed Gaia or very slowly became Gaia so that in the end the balancewas maintained, but numerous atoms of Gaia became non-Gaia as a resultof your visit to us.""Why was that?" asked Trevize curiously.
"Because you would not have been able to endure the conversion,even a very partial one. You were our guests, brought to our worldunder compulsion, in a manner of speaking, and we had to protect youfrom danger, even at the cost of the loss of tiny fragments of Gaia. Itwas a willing price we paid, but not a happy one.""We regret that," said Trevize, "but are you sure that non-Gaianfood, or some kinds of non-Gaian food, might not, in their turn, harmyou ?""No," said Bliss. "What is edible for you would be edible to me. Imerely have the additional problem of metabolizing such food into Gaiaas well as into my own tissues. It represents a psychological barrierthat rather spoils my enjoyment of the food and causes me to eat slowly,but I will overcome that with time.""What about infection?" said Pelorat, in high-pitched alarm. "Ican't understand why I didn't think of this earlier. Bliss! Any worldyou land on is likely to have microorganisms against which you have nodefense and you will die of some simple infectious disease. Trevize,we must turn back.""Don't be panicked, Pel dear," said Bliss, smiling. "Microorganisms,too, are assimilated into Gaia when they are part of my food, or whenthey enter my body in any other way. If they seem to be in the processof doing harm, they will be assimilated the more quickly, and once theyare Gaia, they will do me no harm."The meal drew to its end and Pelorat sipped at his spiced and heatedmixture of fruit juices. "Dear me," he said, licking his lips, "I thinkit is time to change the subject again. It does seem to me that my soleoccupation on board ship is subject-changing. Why is that?"Trevize said solemnly, "Because Bliss and I cling to whatever subjectswe discuss, even to the death. We depend upon you, Janov, to save oursanity. What subject do you want to change to, old friend?""I've gone through my reference material on Comporellon and the entiresector of which it is part is rich in legends of age. They set theirsettlement far back in time, in the first millennium of hyperspatialtravel. Comporellon even speaks of a legendary founder named Benbally,though they don't say when he came from. They say that the original nameof their planet was Benbally World.""And how much truth is there in that, in your opinion, Janov?""A kernel, perhaps, but who can guess what the kernel might be.""I never heard of anyone named Benbally in actual history. Haveyou?""No, I haven't, but you know that in the late Imperial era therewas a deliberate suppression of pre-Imperial history. The Emperors,in the turbulent last centuries of the Empire, were anxious to reducelocal patriotism since they considered it, with ample justification,to be a disintegrating influence. In almost every sector of the Galaxy,therefore, true history, with complete records and accurate chronology,begins only with the days when Trantor's influence made itself felt andthe sector in question had allied Itself to the Empire or been annexedby it.""I shouldn't think that history would be that easy to eradicate,"said Trevize.
"In many ways, it isn't," said Pelorat, "but a determined and powerfulgovernment can weaken it greatly. If it is sufficiently weakened, earlyhistory comes to depend on scattered material and tends to degenerateinto folk tales. Invariably such folk tales will fill with exaggerationand come to show the sector to be older and more powerful than, in alllikelihood, it ever really was. And no matter how silly a particularlegend is, or how impossible it might be on the very face of it, itbecomes a matter of patriotism among the locals to believe it. I canshow you tales from every corner of the Galaxy that speak of originalcolonization as having taken place from Earth itself, though that isnot always the name they give the parent planet.""What else do they call it?""Any of a number of names. They call it the Only, sometimes; andsometimes, the Oldest. Or they call it the Mooned World, which, accordingto some authorities is a reference to its giant satellite. Others claimit means `Lost World' and that `Mooned' is a version of `Marooned,'
a pre-Galactic word meaning `lost' or `abandoned.'"Trevize said gently, "Janov, stop! You'll continue forever withyour authorities and counterauthorities. These legends are everywhere,you say?""Oh yes, my dear fellow. Quite. You have only to go through them togain a feel for this human habit of beginning with some seed of truthand layering about it shell after shell of pretty falsehood inthe fashion of the oysters of Rhampora that build pearls about a pieceof grit. I came across just exactly that metaphor once when ""Janov! Stop again! Tell me, is there anything about Comporellon'slegends that is different from others?""Oh!" Pelorat gazed at Trevize blankly for a moment. "Different? Well,they claim that Earth is relatively nearby and that's unusual. On mostworlds that speak of Earth, under whatever name they choose, there isa tendency to be vague about its location placing it indefinitelyfar away or in some never-never land."Trevize said, "Yes, as some on Sayshell told us that Gaia was locatedin hyperspace."Bliss laughed.
Trevize cast her a quick glance. "It's true. That's what we weretold.""I don't disbelieve it. It's amusing, that's all. It is, of course,what we want them to believe. We only ask to be left alone right now,and where can we be safer and more secure than in hyperspace? If we'renot there, we're as good as there, if people believe that to be ourlocation.""Yes," said Trevize dryly, "and in the same way there is somethingthat causes people to believe that Earth doesn't exist, or that it isfar away, or that it has a radioactive crust.""Except," said Pelorat, "that the Comporellians believe it to berelatively close to themselves.""But nevertheless give it a radioactive crust. One way or another everypeople with an Earth-legend consider Earth to be unapproachable.""That's more or less right," said Pelorat.
Trevize said, "Many on Sayshell believed Gaia to be nearby;some even identified its star correctly; and yet all considered itunapproachable. There may be some Comporellians who insist that Earthis radioactive and dead, but who can identify its star. We will thenapproach it, unapproachable though they may consider it. We did exactlythat in the case of Gaia."Bliss said, "Gaia was willing to receive you, Trevize. You werehelpless in our grip but we had no thought of harming you. What if Earth,too, is powerful, but not benevolent. What then?""I must in any case try to reach it, and accept theconsequences. However, that is my task. Once I locateEarth and head for it, it will not be too late for you to leave. I willput you off on the nearest Foundation world, or take you back to Gaia,if you insist, and then go on to Earth alone.""My dear chap," said Pelorat, in obvious distress. "Don't say suchthings. I wouldn't dream of abandoning you.""Or I of abandoning Pel," said Bliss, as she reached out a hand totouch Pelorat's cheek.
"Very well, then. It won't be long before we're ready to take theJump to Comporellon and thereafter, let us hope, it will be onto Earth."Part Two - Comporellon

Chapter 3: At the Entry Station
9Bliss, entering their chamber, said, "Did Trevizetell you that we are going make the Jump and go through hyperspace anymoment now?"Pelorat, who was bent over his viewing disk, looked up, and said,"Actually, he just looked in and told me `within the half-hour.'""I don't like the thought of it, Pel. I've never liked the Jump. Iget a funny inside-out feeling."Pelorat looked a bit surprised. "I had not thought of you as a spacetraveler, Bliss dear.""I'm not particularly, and I don't mean that this is so only in myaspect as a component. Gaia itself has no occasion for regular spacetravel. By my/our/Gaia's very nature, I/we/Gaia don't explore, trade,or space junket. Still, there is the necessity of having someone at theentry stations ""As when we were fortunate enough to meet you.""Yes, Pel." She smiled at him affectionately. "Or even to visitSayshell and other stellar regions, for various reasons usuallyclandestine. But, clandestine or not, that always means the Jump and,of course, when any part of Gaia Jumps, all of Gaia feels it.""That's too bad," said Pel.
"It could be worse. The large mass of Gaia is not undergoing the Jump, so the effect is greatly diluted. However, Iseem to feel it much more than most of Gaia. As I keep trying to tellTrevize, though all of Gaia is Gaia, the individual components are notidentical. We have our differences, and my makeup is, for some reason,particularly sensitive to the Jump.""Wait!" said Pelorat, suddenly remembering. "Trevize explained that tome once. It's in ordinary ships that you have the worst of the sensation.
In ordinary ships, one leaves the Galactic gravitational field on enteringhyperspace, and comes back to it on returning to ordinary space. It's theleaving and returning that produces the sensation. But the Far Star is a gravitic ship. It is independent of the gravitational field, anddoes not truly leave it or return to it. For that reason, we won't feela thing. I can assure you of that, dear, out of personal experience.""But that's delightful. I wish I had thought to discuss the matterearlier. I would have saved myself considerable apprehension.""That's an advantage in another way," said Pelorat, feeling anexpansion of spirit in his unusual role as explainer of mattersastronautic. "The ordinary ship has to recede from large masses suchas stars for quite a long distance through ordinary space in orderto make the Jump. Part of the reason is that the closer to a star,the more intense the gravitational field, and the more pronounced arethe sensations of a Jump. Then, too, the more intense the gravitationalfield the more complicated the equations that must be solved in orderto conduct the Jump safely and end at the point in ordinary space youwish to end at.
"In a gravitic ship, however, there is no Jump-sensation to speakof. In addition, this ship has a computer that is a great deal moreadvanced than ordinary computers and it can handle complex equationswith unusual skill and speed. The result is that instead of having tomove away from a star for a couple of weeks just to reach a safe andcomfortable distance for a Jump, the Far Star need travel for onlytwo or three days. This is especially so since we are not subject to agravitational field and, therefore, to inertial effects I admitI don't understand that, but that's what Trevize tells me and canaccelerate much more rapidly than an ordinary ship could."Bliss said, "That's fine, and it's to Trev's credit that he can handlethis unusual ship."Pelorat frowned slightly. "Please, Bliss. Say `Trevize.'""I do. I do. In his absence, however, I relax a little.""Don't. You don't want to encourage the habit even slightly, dear. He'sso sensitive about it.""Not about that. He's sensitive about me. He doesn't like me.""That's not so," said Pelorat earnestly. "I talked to him aboutthat. Now, now, don't frown. I was extraordinarily tactful, dearchild. He assured me he did not dislike you. He is suspicious of Gaiaand unhappy over the fact that he has had to make it into the future ofhumanity. We have to make allowances for that. He'll get over it as hegradually comes to understand the advantages of Gaia.""I hope so, but it's not just Gaia. Whatever he may tell you,Pel and remember that he's very fond of you and doesn't want tohurt your feelings he dislikes me personally.""No, Bliss. He couldn't possibly.""Not everyone is forced to love me simply because you do, Pel. Letme explain. Trev all right, Trevize thinks I'm a robot."A look of astonishment suffused Pelorat's ordinarily stolidfeatures. He said, "Surely he can't think you're an artificial humanbeing.""Why is that so surprising? Gaia was settled with the help ofrobots. That's a known fact.""Robots might help, as machines night, but it was people who settled Gaia; people from Earth. That's what Trevize thinks. I knowhe does.""There is nothing in Gaia's memory about Earth as I told you andTrevize. However, in our oldest memories there are still some robots,even after three thousand years, working at the task of completing themodification of Gaia into a habitable world. We were at that time alsoforming Gaia as a planetary consciousness that took a long time,Pel dear, and that's another reason why our early memories are dim,and perhaps it wasn't a matter of Earth wiping them out, as Trevizethinks ""Yes, Bliss," said Pelorat anxiously, "but what of the robots?""Well, as Gaia formed, the robots left. We did not want a Gaia thatincluded robots, for we were, and are, convinced that a robotic componentis, in the long run, harmful to a human society, whether Isolate innature or Planetary. I don't know how we came to that conclusion but itis possible that it is based on events dating back to a particularlyearly time in Galactic history, so that Gaia's memory does not extendback to it.""If the robots left ""Yes, but what if some remained behind? What if I am one ofthem fifteen thousand years old perhaps. Trevize suspects that."Pelorat shook his head slowly. "But you're not.""Are you sure you believe that?""Of course I do. You're not a robot.""How do you know?""Bliss, I know . There's nothing artificial about you. IfI don't know that , no one does.""Isn't it possible I may be so cleverly artificial that in everyrespect, from largest to smallest, I am indistinguishable from thenatural. If I were, how could you tell the difference between me and atrue human being?"Pelorat said, "I don't think it's possible for you to be so cleverlyartificial.""What if it were possible, despite what you think?""I just don't believe it.""Then let's just consider it is a hypothetical case. If I were anindistinguishable robot, how would you feel about it?""Well, I I ""To be specific. How would you feel about making love to a robot?"Pelorat snapped the thumb and mid-finger of his right hand,suddenly. "You know, there are legends of women falling in lovewith artificial men, and vice versa. I always thought there was anallegorical significance to that and never imagined the tales couldrepresent literal truth. Of course, Golan and I never even heardthe word `robot' till we landed on Sayshell, but, now that I think ofit, those artificial men and women must have been robots. Apparently,such robots did exist in early historic times. That means the legendsshould be reconsidered "He fell into silent thought, and, after Bliss had waited a moment,she suddenly clapped her hands sharply. Pelorat jumped.
"Pel dear," said Bliss. "You're using your mythography to escapethe question. The question is: How would you feel about making love toa robot?"He stared at her uneasily. "A truly undistinguishable one? One thatyou couldn't tell from a human being?""Yes.""It seems to me, then, that a robot that can in no way be distinguishedfrom a human being is a human being. If you were such arobot, you would be nothing but a human being to me.""That's what I wanted to hear you say, Pel."Pelorat waited, then said, "Well, then, now that you've heard me sayit, dear, aren't you going to tell me that you are a natural human beingand that I don't have to wrestle with hypothetical situations?""No. I will do no such thing. You've defined a natural human beingas an object that has all the properties of a natural human being. Ifyou are satisfied that I have all those properties, then that ends thediscussion. We've got the operational definition and need no other. Afterall, how do I know that you're not just a robot who happensto be indistinguishable from a human being?""Because I tell you that I am not.""Ah, but if you were a robot that was indistinguishable from a humanbeing, you might be designed to tell me you were a natural human being,and you might even be programmed to believe it yourself. The operationaldefinition is all we have, and all we can have."She put her arms about Pelorat's neck and kissed him. The kiss grewmore passionate, and prolonged itself until Pelorat managed to say,in somewhat muffled fashion, "But we promised Trevize not to embarrasshim by converting this ship into a honeymooners' haven."Bliss said coaxingly, "Let's be carried away and not leave ourselvesany time to think of promises."Pelorat, troubled, said, "But I can't do that, dear. I knowit must irritate you, Bliss, but I am constantly thinking and I amconstitutionally averse to letting myself be carried away by emotion. It'sa lifelong habit, and probably very annoying to others. I've neverlived with a woman who didn't seem to object to it sooner or later. Myfirst wife but I suppose it would be inappropriate to discussthat ""Rather inappropriate, yes, but not fatally so. You're not my firstlover either.""Oh!" said Pelorat, rather at a loss, and then, aware of Bliss'ssmall smile, he said, "I mean, of course not. I wouldn't expect myselfto have been Anyway, my first wife didn't like it.""But I do. I find your endless plunging into thought attractive.""I can't believe that , but I do have anotherthought. Robot or human, that doesn't matter. We agree on that. However,I am an Isolate and you know it. I am not part of Gaia, and when weare intimate, you're sharing emotions outside Gaia even when you letme participate in Gaia for a short period, and it may not be the sameintensity of emotion then that you would experience if it were Gaialoving Gaia."Bliss said, "Loving you, Pel, has its own delight. I look no fartherthan that.""But it's not just a matter of you loving me. You aren't merelyyou. What if Gaia considers it a perversion?""If it did, I would know, for I am Gaia. And since I have delight inyou, Gaia does. When we make love, all of Gaia shares the sensation tosome degree or other. When I say I love you, that means Gaia loves you,although it is only the part that I am that is assigned the immediaterole. You seem confused.""Being an Isolate, Bliss, I don't quite grasp it.""One can always form an analogy with the body of an Isolate. Whenyou whistle a tune, your entire body, you as an organism,wishes to whistle the tune, but the immediate task of doing so is assignedto your lips, tongue, and lungs. Your right big toe does nothing.""It might tap to the tune.""But that is not necessary to the act of whistling. The tapping ofthe big toe is not the action itself but is a response to the action,and, to be sure, all parts of Gaia might well respond in some small wayor other to my emotion, as I respond to theirs."Pelorat said, "I suppose there's no use feeling embarrassed aboutthis.""None at all.""But it does give me a queer sense of responsibility. When I try tomake you happy, I find that I must be trying to make every last organismon Gaia happy.""Every last atom but you do. You add to the sense of communaljoy that I let you share briefly. I suppose your contribution is toosmall to be easily measurable, but it is there, and knowing it is thereshould increase your joy."Pelorat said, "I wish I could be sure that Golan is sufficiently busywith his maneuvering through hyperspace to remain in the pilot-room forquite a while.""You wish to honeymoon, do you?""I do.""Than get a sheet of paper, write `Honeymoon Haven' on it, affixIt to the outside of the door, and if he wants to enter, that's hisproblem."Pelorat did so, and it was during the pleasurable proceedings thatfollowed that the Far Star made the Jump. Neither Pelorat norBliss detected the action, nor would they have, had they been payingattention.
10It had been only a matter of a few months since Pelorat had metTrevize and had left Terminus for the first time. Until then, for themore than half-century (Galactic Standard) of his life, he had beenutterly planet-bound.
In his own mind, he had in those months become an old space dog. He hadseen three planets from space: Terminus itself, Sayshell, and Gaia. And onthe viewscreen, he now saw a fourth, albeit through a computer-controlledtelescopic device. The fourth was Comporellon.
And again, for the fourth time, he was vaguely disappointed. Somehow,he continued to feel that looking down upon a habitable world from spacemeant seeing an outline of its continents against a surrounding sea; or,if it were a dry world, the outline of its lakes against a surroundingbody of land.
It was never so.
If a world was habitable, it had an atmosphere as well as ahydrosphere. And if it had both air and water, it had clouds; and ifit had clouds, it had an obscured view. Once again, then, Pelorat foundhimself looking down on white swirls with an occasional glimpse of paleblue or rusty brown.
He wondered gloomily if anyone could identify a world if a viewof it from, say, three hundred thousand kilometers, were cast upon ascreen. How does one tell one cloud swirl from another?
Bliss looked at Pelorat with some concern. "What is it, Pel? You seemto be unhappy.""I find that all planets look alike from space."Trevize said, "What of that, Janov? So does every shoreline onTerminus, when it is on the horizon, unless you know what you're lookingfor a particular mountain peak, or a particular offshore islet ofcharacteristic shape.""I dare say," said Pelorat, with clear dissatisfaction, "but what doyou look for in a mass of shifting clouds? And even if you try, beforeyou can decide, you're likely to be moving into the dark side.""Look a little more carefully, Janov. If you follow the shape of theclouds, you see that they tend to fall into a pattern that circles theplanet and that moves about a center. That center is more or less atone of the poles.""Which one?" asked Bliss with interest.
"Since, relative to ourselves, the planet is rotating in clockwisefashion, we are looking down, by definition, upon the south pole. Sincethe center seems to be about fifteen degrees from the terminator theplanet's line of shadow and the planetary axis is tilted twenty-onedegrees to the perpendicular of its plane of revolution, we're eitherin mid-spring or mid-summer depending on whether the pole is moving awayfrom the terminator or toward it. The computer can calculate its orbit andtell me in short order if I were to ask it. The capital is on the northernside of the equator so it is either in mid-fall or mid-winter."Pelorat frowned. "You can tell all that?" He looked at the cloudlayer as though he thought it would, or should, speak to him now, but,of course, it didn't.
"Not only that," said Trevize, "but if you'll look at the polarregions, you'll see that there are no breaks in the cloud layer as thereare away from the poles. Actually, there are breaks, but through thebreaks you see ice, so it's a matter of white on white.""Ah," said Pelorat. "I suppose you expect that at the poles.""Of habitable planets, certainly. Lifeless planets might be airless orwaterless, or might have certain stigmata showing that the clouds are notwater a clouds, or that the ice is not water ice. This planet lacks thosestigmata, so we know we are looking at water clouds and water ice.
"The next thing we notice is the size of the area of unbrokenwhite on the day side of the terminator, and to the experienced eye itis at once seen as larger than average. Furthermore, you can detecta certain orange glint, a quite faint one, to the reflected light,and that means Comporellon's sun if rather cooler than Terminus'ssun. Although Comporellon is closer to its sun than Terminus is tohers, it is not sufficiently closer to make up for its star's lowertemperature. Therefore, Comporellon is a cold world as habitable worldsgo.""You read it like a film, old chap," said Pelorat admiringly.
"Don't be too impressed," said Trevize, smiling affectionately. "Thecomputer has given me the applicable statistics of the world, includingits slightly low average temperature. It is easy to deduce somethingyou already know. In fact, Comporellon is at the edge of an ice ageand would be having one, if the configuration of its continents weremore suitable to such a condition."Bliss bit at her lower lip. "I don't like a cold world.""We've got warm clothing," said Trevize.
"That doesn't matter. Human beings aren't adapted to cold weather,really. We don't have thick coats of hair or feathers, or a subcutaneouslayer of blubber. For a world to have cold weather seems to indicate acertain indifference to the welfare of its own parts."Trevize said, "Is Gaia a uniformly mild world?""Most of it, yes. There are some cold areas for cold-adapted plants andanimals, and some hot areas for heat-adapted plants and animals, but mostparts are uniformly mild, never getting uncomfortably hot or uncomfortablycold, for those between, including human beings, of course.""Human beings, of course. All parts of Gaia are alive and equal inthat respect, but some, like human beings, are obviously more equalthan other.""Don't be foolishly sarcastic," said Bliss, with a trace ofwaspishness. "The level and intensity of consciousness and awarenessare important. A human being is a more useful portion of Gaia than arock of the same weight would be, and the properties and functions ofGaia as a whole are necessarily weighted in the direction of the humanbeing not as much so as on your Isolate worlds, however. What'smore, there are times when it is weighted in other directions, whenthat is needed for Gaia as a whole. It might even, at long intervals,be weighted in the direction of the rocky interior. That, too, demandsattention or, in the lack of that attention all parts of Gaia mightsuffer. We wouldn't want an unnecessary volcanic eruption, would we?""No," said Trevize. "Not an unnecessary one.""You're not impressed, are you?""Look," said Trevize. "We have worlds that are colder than averageand worlds that are warmer; worlds that are tropical forests to a largeextent, and worlds that are vast savannahs. No two worlds are alike,and every one of them is home to those who are used to it. I am used tothe relative mildness of Terminus we've tamed it to an almost Gaianmoderation, actually but I like to get away, at least temporarily,to something different. What we have, Bliss, that Gaia doesn't have,is variation. If Gaia expands into Galaxia, will every world in theGalaxy be forced into mildness? The sameness would be unbearable."Bliss said, "If that is so, and if variety seems desirable, varietywill be maintained.""As a gift from the central committee, so to speak?" said Trevizedryly. "And as little of it as they can bear to part with? I'd ratherleave it to nature.""But you haven't left it to nature. Every habitable worldin the Galaxy has been modified. Every single one was found in a stateof nature that was uncomfortable for humanity, and every single one wasmodified until it was as mild as could be managed. If this world hereis cold, I am certain that is because its inhabitants couldn't warm itany further without unacceptable expense. And even so, the portions theyactually inhabit we can be sure are artificially warmed into mildness. Sodon't be so loftily virtuous about leaving it to nature."Trevize said, "You speak for Gaia, I suppose.""I always speak for Gaia. I am Gaia.""Then if Gaia is so certain of its own superiority, why did you requiremy decision? Why have you not gone ahead without me?"Bliss paused, as though to collect her thoughts. She said, "Because itis not wise to trust one's self overmuch. We naturally see our virtueswith clearer eyes than we see our defects. We are anxious to do whatis right; not necessarily what seems right to us, but whatis right, objectively, if such a thing as objective rightexists. You seem to be the nearest approach to objective right that wecan find, so we are guided by you.""So objectively right," said Trevize sadly, "that I don't evenunderstand my own decision and I seek its justification.""You'll find it," said Bliss.
"I hope so," said Trevize.
"Actually, old chap," said Pelorat, "it seems to me that this recentexchange was won rather handily by Bliss. Why don't you recognize thefact that her arguments justify your decision that Gaia is the wave ofthe future for humanity?""Because," said Trevize harshly, "I did not know those argumentsat the time I made my decision. I knew none of these details aboutGaia. Something else influenced me, at least unconsciously, somethingthat doesn't depend upon Gaian detail, but must be more fundamental. Itis that which I must find out."Pelorat held up a placating hand. "Don't be angry, Golan.""I'm not angry. I'm just under rather unbearable tension. I don'twant to be the focus of the Galaxy."Bliss said, "I don't blame you for that, Trevize, and I'm truly sorrythat your own makeup has somehow forced you into the post. Whenwill we be landing on Comporellon?""In three days," said Trevize, "and only after we stop at one of theentry stations in orbit about it."Pelorat said, "There shouldn't be any problem with that, shouldthere?"Trevize shrugged. "It depends on the number of ships approachingthe world, the number of entry stations that exist, and, most of all,on the particular rules for permitting and refusing admittance. Suchrules change from time to time."Pelorat said indignantly, "What do you mean refusing admittance? How can they refuse admittance to citizens of theFoundation? Isn't Comporellan part of the Foundation dominion?""Well, yes and no. There's a delicate matter of legalism aboutthe point and I'm not sure how Comporellon interprets it. I supposethere's a chance we'll be refused admission, but I don't think it's alarge chance.""And if we are refused, what do we do?""I'm not sure," said Trevize. "Let's wait and see what happens beforewe wear ourselves out making contingency plans."11They were close enough to Comporellon now for it toappear as a substantial globe without telescopic enlargement. When suchenlargement was added, however, the entry stations themselves could beseen. They were farther out than most of the orbiting structures aboutthe planet and they were well lit.
Approaching as the Far Star was from the direction of theplanet's southern pole, half its globe was sunlit constantly. The entrystations on its night side were naturally more clearly seen as sparksof light. They were evenly spaced in an arc about the planet. Six ofthem were visible (plus six on the day side undoubtedly) and all werecircling the planet at even and identical speeds.
Pelorat, a little awed at the sight, said, "There are other lightscloser to the planet. What are they?"Trevize said, "I don't know the planet in detail so I can't tellyou. Some might be orbiting factories or laboratories or observatories,or even populated townships. Some planets prefer to keep all orbitingobjects outwardly dark, except for the entry stations. Terminus does,for instance. Comporellon conducts itself on a more liberal principle,obviously.""Which entry station do we go to, Golan?""It depends on them. I've sent in my request to land on Comporellonand we'll eventually get our directions as to which entry station to goto, and when. Much depends on how many incoming ships are trying to makeentry at present. If there are a dozen ships lined up at each station,we will have no choice but to be patient."Bliss said, "I've only been at hyperspatial distances from Gaia twicebefore, and those were both when I was at or near Sayshell. I've neverbeen at anything like this distance."Trevize looked at her sharply. "Does it matter? You're still Gaia,aren't you?"For a moment, Bliss looked irritated, but then dissolved into whatwas almost an embarrassed titter. "I must admit you've caught me thistime, Trevize. There is a double meaning in the word `Gaia.' It canbe used to refer to the physical planet as a solid globular object inspace. It can also be used to refer to the living object that includesthat globe. Properly speaking, we should use two different words for thesetwo different concepts, but Gaians always know from the context what isbeing referred to. I admit that an Isolate might be puzzled at times.""Well, then," said Trevize, "admitting that you are many thousands ofparsecs from Gaia as globe, are you still part of Gaia as organism?""Referring to the organism, I am still Gaia.""No attenuation?""Not in essence. I'm sure I've already told you there is some addedcomplexity in remaining Gaia across hyperspace, but I remain Gaia."Trevize said, "Does it occur to you that Gaia may be viewed as aGalactic kraken the tentacled monster of the legends withits tentacles reaching everywhere. You have but to put a few Gaians oneach of the populated worlds and you will virtually have Galaxia rightthere. In fact. you have probably done exactly that. Where are yourGaians located? I presume that one or more are on Terminus and one ormore are on Trantor. How much farther does this go?"Bliss looked distinctly uncomfortable. "I have said I won't lie toyou, Trevize, but that doesn't mean I feel compelled to give you thewhole truth. There are some things you have no need to know, and theposition and identity of individual bits of Gaia are among them.""Do I need to know the reason for the existence of those tentacles,Bliss, even if I don't know where they are?""It is the opinion of Gaia that you do not.""I presume, though, that I may guess. You believe you serve as theguardians of the Galaxy.""We are anxious to have a stable and secure Galaxy; a peaceful andprosperous one. The Seldon Plan, as originally worked out by Hari Seldonat least, is designed to develop a Second Galactic Empire, one thatis more stable and more workable than the First was. The Plan, whichhas been continually modified and improved by the Second Foundation,has appeared to be working well so far.""But Gaia doesn't want a Second Galactic Empire in the classic sense,does it? You want Galaxia a living Galaxy.""Since you permit it, we hope, in time, to have Galaxia. If you hadnot permitted it, we would have striven for Seldon's Second Empire andmade it as secure as we could.""But what is wrong with "His ear caught the soft, burring signal. Trevize said, "The computeris signaling me. I suppose it is receiving directions concerning theentry station. I'll be back."He stepped into the pilot-room and placed his hands on those markedout on the desk top and found that there were directions forthe specific entry station he was to approach its co-ordinateswith reference to the line from Comporellon's center to its northpole the prescribed route of approach.
Trevize signaled his acceptance, and then sat back for a moment.
The Seldon Plan! He had not thought of it for quite a time. The FireGalactic Empire had crumbled and for five hundred years the Foundationhad grown, first in competition with that Empire, and then upon itsruins all in accordance with the Plan.
There had been the interruption of the Mule, which, for a time, hadthreatened to shiver the Plan into fragments, but the Foundation hadpulled through probably with the help of the ever-hidden SecondFoundation possibly with the help of the even-better-hiddenGaia.
Now the Plan was threatened by something more serious than the Mule hadever been. It was to be diverted from a renewal of Empire to somethingutterly different from anything in history Galaxia. And hehimself had agreed to that. But why? Was there a flaw in the Plan? A basic flaw?
For one flashing moment, it seemed to Trevize that this flaw did indeedexist and that he knew what it was, that he had known what it was whenhe made his decision but the knowledge if that were what itwas vanished as fast as it came, and it left him with nothing.
Perhaps it was all only an illusion; both when he had made hisdecision, and now. After all, he knew nothing about the Plan beyond thebasic assumptions that validated psychohistory. Apart from that, he knewno detail, and certainly not a single scrap of its mathematics.
He closed his eyes and thought There was nothing.
Might it be the added power he received from the computer? He placedhis hands on the desk top and felt the warmth of the computer's handsembracing them. He closed his eyes and once more he thought There was still nothing.
12The Comporellian who boarded the ship wore a holographic identitycard. It displayed his chubby, lightly bearded face with remarkablefidelity, and underneath it was his name, A. Kendray.
He was rather short, and his body was as softly rounded as his facewas. He had a fresh and easygoing look and manner, and he stared aboutthe ship with clear amazement.
He said, "How did you get down this fast? We weren't expecting youfor two hours.""It's a new-model ship," said Trevize, with noncommittalpoliteness.
Kendray was not quite the young innocent he looked, however. Hestepped into the pilot-room and said at once, "Gravitic?"Trevize saw no point in denying anything that was apparently thatobvious. He said tonelessly, "Yes.""Very interesting. You hear of them, but you never see themsomehow. Motors in the hull?""That's so."Kendray looked at the computer. "Computer circuits, likewise?""That's so. Anyway, I'm told so. I've never looked.""Oh well. What I need is the ship's documentation; engine number,place of manufacture, identification code, the whole patty-cake. It'sall in the computer, I'm sure, and it can probably turn out the formalcard I need in half a second."It took very little more than that. Kendray looked about again. "Youthree all the people on board?"Trevize said, "That's right.""Any live animals? Plants? State of health?""No. No. And good," said Trevize crisply.
"Um!" said Kendray, making notes. "Could you put your hand inhere? Just routine. Right hand, please."Trevize looked at the device without favor. It was being used more andmore commonly, and was growing quickly more elaborate. You could almosttell the backwardness of a world at a glance by the backwardness of itsmicrodetector. There were now few worlds, however backward, that didn'thave one at all. The start had come with the final breakup of the Empire,as each fragment of the whole grew increasingly anxious to protect itselffrom the diseases and alien microorganisms of all the others.
"What is that?" asked Bliss, in a low and interested voice, craningher head to see it first on one side, then the other.
Pelorat said, "A microdetector, I believe they call it."Trevize added, "It's nothing mysterious. It's a device thatautomatically checks a portion of your body, inside and out, for anymicroorganism capable of transmitting disease.""This will classify the microorganisms, too," said Kendray, withrather more than a hint of pride. "It's been worked out right hereon Comporellon. And if you don't mind, I still want your righthand."Trevize inserted his right hand, and watched as a series of smallred markings danced along a set of horizontal lines. Kendray touched acontact and a facsimile in color appeared at once. "If you'll sign that,sir," he said.
Trevize did so. "How badly off am I?" he asked. "I'm not in any greatdanger, am I?"Kendray said, "I'm not a physician, so I can't say in detail, but itshows none of the marks that would require you to be turned away or tobe put in quarantine. That's all I'm interested in.""What a lucky break for me," said Trevize dryly, shaking his hand torid himself of the slight tingle he felt.
"You, sir," said Kendray.
Pelorat inserted his hand with a certain hesitancy, then signed thefacsimile.
"And you, ma'am?"A few moments later, Kendray was staring at the result, saying,"I never saw anything like this before." He looked up at Bliss with anexpression of awe. "You're negative. Altogether.'"Bliss smiled engagingly. "How nice.""Yes, ma'am. I envy you." He looked back at the first facsimile,and said, "Your identification, Mr. Trevize."Trevize presented it. Kendray, glancing at it, again looked up insurprise. "Councilman of the Terminus Legislature?""That's right.""High official of the Foundation?"Trevize said coolly, "Exactly right. So let's get through with thisquickly, shall we?""You're captain of the ship?""Yes, I am.""Purpose of visit?""Foundation security, and that's all the answer I'm going to giveyou. Do you understand that?""Yes, sir. How long do you intend to stay?""I don't know. Perhaps a week.""Very well, sir. And this other gentleman?""He is Dr. Janov Pelorat," said Trevize. "You have his signature thereand I vouch for him. He is a scholar of Terminus and he is my assistantin this business of my visit.""I understand, sir, but I must see his identification. Rules are rules,I'm afraid. I hope you understand, sir."Pelorat presented his papers.
Kendray nodded. "And you, miss?"Trevize said quietly, "No need to bother the lady. I vouch for her,too.""Yes, sir. But I need the identification."Bliss said, "I'm afraid I don't have any papers, sir."Kendray frowned. "I beg your pardon."Trevize said, "The young lady didn't bring any with her. Anoversight. It's perfectly all right. I'll take full responsibility."Kendray said, "I wish I could let you do that, but I'm not allowed. Theresponsibility is mine. Under the circumstances, it's not terriblyimportant. There should be no difficulty getting duplicates. The youngwoman, I presume, is from Terminus.""No, she's not.""From somewhere in Foundation territory, then?""As a matter of fact, she isn't."Kendray looked at Bliss keenly, then at Trevize. "That's acomplication, Councilman. It may take additional time to obtain aduplicate from some non-Foundation world. Since you're not a Foundationcitizen, Miss Bliss, I must have the name of your world of birth andof the world of which you're a citizen. You will then have to wait forduplicate papers to arrive."Trevize said, "See here, Mr. Kendray. I see no reason why there needbe any delay whatever. I am a high official of the Foundation governmentand I am here on a mission of great importance. I must not be delayedby a matter of trivial paperwork.""The choice isn't mine, Councilman. If it were up to me, I'd let youdown to Comporellon right now, but I have a thick book of rules thatguides my every action. I've got to go by the book or I get it thrown atme. Of course, I presume there must be some Comporellian governmentfigure who's waiting for you. If you'll tell me who it is, I will contacthim, and if he orders me to let you through, then that's it."Trevize hesitated a moment. "That would not be politic,Mr. Kendray. May I speak with your immediate superior?""You certainly may, but you can't just see him off-hand ""I'm sure he will come at once when he understands he's speaking toa Foundation official ""Actually," said Kendray, "just between us, that would make mattersworse. We're not part of the Foundation metropolitan territory,you know. We come under the heading of an Associated Power, andwe take it seriously. The people are anxious not to appear to beFoundation puppets I'm using the popular expression only, youunderstand and they bend backward to demonstrate independence. Mysuperior would expect to get extra points if he resists doing a special favor for a Foundation official."Trevize's expression darkened. "And you, too?"Kendray shook his head. "I'm below politics, sir. No one gives meextra points for anything. I'm just lucky if they pay my salary. Andthough I don't get extra points, I can get demerits, and quite easily,too. I wish that were not so.""Considering my position, you know, I can take care of you.""No, sir. I'm sorry if that sounds impertinent, but I don't thinkyou can. And, sir, it's embarrassing to say this, but please don'toffer me anything valuable. They make examples of officials who acceptsuch things and they're pretty good at digging them out, these days.""I wasn't thinking of bribing you. I'm only thinking of what theMayor of Terminus can do to you if you interfere with my mission.""Councilman, I'll be perfectly safe as long as I can hide behind therulebook. If the members of the Comporellian Presidium get some sort ofFoundation discipline, that is their concern, and not mine. But ifit will help, sir, I can let you and Dr. Pelorat through on your ship. Ifyou'll leave Miss Bliss behind at the entry station, we'll hold her fora time and send her down to the surface as soon as her duplicate paperscome through. If her papers should not be obtainable, for any reason,we will send her back to her world on commercial transportation. I'mafraid, though, that someone will have to pay her fare, in that case."Trevize caught Pelorat's expression at that, and said, "Mr. Kendray,may I speak to you privately in the pilot-room?""Very well, but I can't remain on board very much longer, or I'llbe questioned.""This won't take long," said Trevize.
In the pilot-room, Trevize made a show of closing the door tightly,then said, in a low voice, "I've been many places, Mr. Kendray, butI've never been anyplace where there has been such harsh emphasis onthe minutiae of the rules of immigration, particularly for Foundationpeople and Foundation officials .""But the young woman is not from the Foundation.""Even so."Kendray said, "These things go in rhythms. We've had some scandalsand, right now, things are tough. If you'll come back next year, youmight not have any trouble at all, but right now, I can do nothing.""Try, Mr. Kendray," said Trevize, his voice growing mellow. "I'm goingto throw myself on your mercy and appeal to you, man to man. Peloratand I have been on this mission for quite a while. He and I. Just heand I. We're good friends, but there's something lonely about it, if youget me. Some time ago, Pelorat found this little lady. I don't have totell you what happened, but we decided to bring her along. It keeps ushealthy to make use of her now and then.
"Now the thing is Pelorat's got a relationship back on Terminus. I'mclear, you understand, but Pelorat is an older man and he's got to theage when they get a little desperate. They need their youth back,or something. He can't give her up. At the same time, if she's evenmentioned, officially, there's going to be misery galore on Terminusfor old Pelorat when he gets back.
"There's no harm being done, you understand. Miss Bliss, as she callsherself a good name considering her profession is not exactlya bright kid; that's not what we want her for. Do you have to mentionher at all? Can't you just list me and Pelorat on the ship? Only wewere originally listed when we left Terminus. There need be no officialnotice of the woman. After all, she's absolutely free of disease. Younoted that yourself."Kendray made a face. "I don't really want to inconvenience you. Iunderstand the situation and, believe me, I sympathize. Listen,if you think holding down a shift on this station for months at atime is any fun, think again. And it isn't co-educational, either;not on Comporellon." He shook his head. "And I have a wife, too, so Iunderstand. But, look, even if I let you through, as soon as theyfind out that the uh lady is without papers, she's in prison,you and Mr. Pelorat are in the kind of trouble that will get back toTerminus. And I myself will surely be out of a job.""Mr. Kendray," said Trevize, "trust me in this. Once I'm onComporellon, I'll be safe. I can talk about my mission to some of theright people and, when that's done, there'll be no further trouble. I'lltake full responsibility for what has happened here, if it ever comesup which I doubt. What's more, I will recommend your promotion,and you will get it, because I'll see to it that Terminus leans all overanyone who hesitates. And we can give Pelorat a break."Kendray hesitated, then said, "All right. I'll let youthrough but take a word of warning. I start from this minutefiguring out a way to save my butt if the matter comes up. I don't intendto do one thing to save yours. What's more I know how these things workon Comporellon and you don't, and Comporellon isn't an easy world forpeople who step out of line.""Thank you, Mr. Kendray," said Trevize. "There'll be no trouble. Iassure you of that."


Chapter 4: On Comporellon
13They were through. The entry station had shrunk to arapidly dimming star behind them, and in a couple of hours they wouldbe crossing the cloud layer.
A gravitic ship did not have to brake its path by a long routeof slow spiral contraction, but neither could it swoop downwardtoo rapidly. Freedom from gravity did not mean freedom from airresistance. The ship could descend in a straight line, but it was stilla matter for caution; it could not be too fast.
"Where are we going to go?" asked Pelorat, looking confused. "I can'ttell one place in the clouds from another, old fellow.""No more can I," said Trevize, "but we have an official holographicmap of Comporellon, which gives the shape of the land masses and anexaggerated relief for both land heights and ocean depths andpolitical subdivisions, too. The map is in the computer and that will dothe work. It will match the planetary land-sea design to the map, thusorienting the ship properly, and it will then take us to the capital bya cycloidic pathway."Pelorat said, "If we go to the capital, we plunge immediately intothe political vortex. If the world is anti-Foundation, as the fellow atthe entry station implied, we'll be asking for trouble.""On the other hand, it's bound to be the intellectual center ofthe planet, and if we want information, that's where we'll find it, ifanywhere. As for being anti-Foundation, I doubt that they will be ableto display that too openly. The Mayor may have no great liking for me,but neither can she afford to have a Councilman mistreated. She wouldnot care to allow the precedent to be established."Bliss had emerged from the toilet, her hands still damp fromscrubbing. She adjusted her underclothes with no sign of concern and said,"By the way, I trust the excreta is thoroughly recycled.""No choice," said Trevize. "How long do you suppose our watersupply would last without recycling of excreta? On what do you thinkthose choicely flavored yeast cakes that we eat to lend spice to ourfrozen staples grow? I hope that doesn't spoil your appetite,my efficient Bliss.""Why should it? Where do you suppose food and water come from on Gaia,or on this planet, or on Terminus?""On Gaia," said Trevize, "the excreta is, of course, as alive asyou are.""Not alive. Conscious. There is a difference. The level ofconsciousness is, naturally, very low."Trevize sniffed in a disparaging way, but didn't try to answer. Hesaid, "I'm going into the pilot-room to keep the computer company. Notthat it needs me."Pelorat said, "May we come in and help you keep it company? I can'tquite get used to the fact that it can get us down all by itself; thatit can sense other ships, or storms, or whatever?"Trevize smiled broadly. "Get used to it, please. The ship is far saferunder the computer's control than it ever would be under mine. Butcertainly, come on. It will do you good to watch what happens."They were over the sunlit side of the planet now for, as Trevizeexplained, the map in the computer could be more easily matched toreality in the sunlight than in the dark.
"That's obvious," said Pelorat.
"Not at all obvious. The computer will judge just as rapidly by theinfrared light which the surface radiates even in the dark. However, thelonger waves of infrared don't allow the computer quite the resolutionthat visible light would. That is, the computer doesn't see quite asfinely and sharply by infrared, and where necessity doesn't drive,I like to make things as easy as possible for the computer.""What if the capital is on the dark side?""The chance is fifty-fifty," said Trevize, "but if it is, once the mapis matched by daylight, we can skim down to the capital quite unerringlyeven if it is in the dark. And long before we come anywhere near thecapital, we'll be intersecting microwave beams and will be receivingmessages directing us to the most convenient spaceport. There'snothing to worry about.""Are you sure?" said Bliss. "You're bringing me down without papers andwithout any native world that these people here will recognize andI'm bound and determined not to mention Gaia to them in any case. Sowhat do we do, if I'm asked for my papers once we're on the surface?"Trevize said, "That's not likely to happen. Everyone will assume thatwas taken care of at the entry station.""But if they ask?""Then, when that time comes, we'll face the problem. Meanwhile,let's not manufacture problems out of air.""By the time we face the problems that may arise, it might well betoo late to solve them.""I'll rely on my ingenuity to keep it from being too late.""Talking about ingenuity, how did you get us through the entrystation?"Trevize looked at Bliss, and let his lips slowly expand into a smilethat made him seem like an impish teenager. "Just brains."Pelorat said, "What did you do, old man?"Trevize said, "It was a matter of appealing to him in the correctmanner. I'd tried threats and subtle bribes. I had appealed to his logicand his loyalty to the Foundation. Nothing worked, so I fell back onthe last resort. I said that you were cheating on your wife, Pelorat.""My wife ? But, my dear fellow, I don't have a wife atthe moment.""I know that, but he didn't."Bliss said, "By `wife,' I presume you mean a woman who is a particularman's regular companion."Trevize said, "A little more than that, Bliss. A legal companion, one with enforceable rights in consequence of thatcompanionship."Pelorat said nervously, "Bliss, I do not have a wife. Ihave had one now and then in the past, but I haven't had one for quitea while. If you would care to undergo the legal ritual ""Oh, Pel," said Bliss, making a sweeping-away movement with her righthand, "what would I care about that? I have innumerable companions thatare as close to me as your arm is close companion to your other arm. Itis only Isolates who feel so alienated that they have to use artificialconventions to enforce a feeble substitute for true companionship.""But I am an Isolate, Bliss dear.""You will be less Isolate in time, Pel. Never truly Gaia, perhaps,but less Isolate, and you will have a flood of companions.""I only want you, Bliss," said Pel.
"That's because you know nothing about it. You'll learn."Trevize was concentrating on the viewscreen during that exchange witha look of strained tolerance on his face. The cloud cover had come upclose and, for a moment, all was gray fog.
Microwave vision, he thought, and the computer switched at once tothe detection of radar echoes. The clouds disappeared and the surfaceof Comporellon appeared in false color, the boundaries between sectorsof different constitution a little fuzzy and wavering.
"Is that the way it's going to look from now on?" asked Bliss, withsome astonishment.
"Only till we drift below the clouds. Then it's back to sunlight." Evenas he spoke, the sunshine and normal visibility returned.
"I see," said Bliss. Then, turning toward him, "But what I don't seeis why it should matter to that official at the entry station whetherPel was deceiving his wife or not?""If that fellow, Kendray, had held you back, the news, I said, mightreach Terminus and, therefore, Pelorat's wife. Pelorat would then be introuble. I didn't specify the sort of trouble he would be in, but I triedto sound as though it would be bad. There is a kind of free-masonryamong males," Trevize was grinning, now, "and one male doesn't betrayanother fellow male. He would even help, if requested. The reasoning,I suppose, is that it might be the helper's turn next to be helped. Ipresume," he added, turning a bit graver, "that there is a similarfree-masonry among women, but, not being a woman, I have never had anopportunity to observe it closely."Bliss's face resembled a pretty thundercloud. "Is this a joke?" shedemanded.
"No, I'm serious," said Trevize. "I don't say that      Kendrayfellow let us through only to help Janov avoid angering his wife. Themasculine free-masonry may simply have added the last push to my otherarguments.""But      is horrible. I  is its rules that hold society together andbind it into a whole. Is it such a light   ing to disregard the rulesfor trivial reasons?""Well," said Trevize, in instant defensiveness, "some of the rulesare themselves trivial. Few worlds are very particular about passage inand out of their space in times of peace and commercial prosperity, suchas we have now, thanks to the Foundation. Comporellon, for some reason,is out of step probably because of an obscure matter of internalpolitics. Why should we suffer over that?""T    is beside the point. If we only obey those rules that we   inkare just and reasonable, then no rule will stand, for there is no rulethat some will not   ink is unjust and unreasonable. Andif we wish to push our own individual advantage, as we see it, then wewill always find reason to believe that some hampering rule is unjustand unreasonable. What starts, then, as a shrewd trick ends in anarchyand disaster, even for the shrewd trickster, since he, too, will notsurvive the collapse of society."Trevize said, "Society will not collapse that easily. You speakas Gaia, and Gaia cannot possibly understand the association of freeindividuals. Rules, established with reason and justice, can easilyoutlive their usefulness as circumstances change, yet can remain inforce through inertia. I  is then not only right, but useful, to breakthose rules as a way of advertising the fact      they have becomeuseless or even actually harmful.""Then every   ief and murderer can argue he is serving humanity.""You go to extremes. In the superorganism of Gaia, there is automaticconsensus on the rules of society and it occurs to no one to breakthem. One might as well say that Gaia vegetates and fossilizes. There isadmittedly an element of disorder in free association, but      is theprice one must pay fog the ability to induce novelty and change. Onthe whole, it's a reasonable price."Bliss's voice rose a notch. "You are quite wrong if you   ink Gaiavegetates and fossilizes. Our deeds, our ways, our views are underconstant self-examination. They do not persist out of inertia, beyondreason. Gaia learns by experience and thought; and therefore changeswhen      is necessary.""Even if w    you say is so, the self-examination and learning mustbe slow, because not ing but Gaia exists on Gaia. Here, in freedom, evenwhen almost everyone agrees, there are bound to be a few who disagree and,in some cases, those few may be right, and if they are clever enough,enthusiastic enough, right enough, they will win out in theend and be heroes in future ages like Hari Seldon, who perfectedpsychohistory, pitted his own thoughts against the entire Galactic Empire,and won.""He has won only so far, Trevize. The Second Empire he planned forwill not come to pass. There will be Galaxia instead.""Will there?" said Trevize grimly.
"I  was your decision, and, however much you argue withme in favor of Isolates and of their freedom to be foolish and criminal,there is somet ing in the hidden recesses of your mind that forced youto agree with me/us/Gaia when you made your choice.""W    is present in the hidden recesses of my mind," said Trevize,more grimly still, "is w    I seek. There, to begin with," he added,pointing to the viewscreen where a gre   city spread out  o the horizon,a cluster of low structures climbing to occasional heights, surroundedby fields th   were brown under a light frost.
Pelorat shook his head. "Too bad. I meant to watch the approach,but I got caught up in listening to the argument."Trevize said, "Never mind, Janov. You can watch when we leave. I'llpromise to keep my mouth shut   en, if you can persuade Bliss to controlher own."And the Far Star descended a microwave beam to a landing atthe spaceport.
14Kendray looked grave when he returned to the entrystation and watched the Far Star pass through. He was stillclearly depressed at the close of his shift.
He was sitting down to his closing meal of the day when one of hismates, a gangling fellow with wide-set eyes, thin light hair, and eyebrowsso blond they seemed absent, sat down next to him.
"What's wrong, Ken?" said the other.
Kendray's lips twisted. He said, "That was a gravitic ship that justpassed through, Gatis.""The odd-looking one with zero radioactivity?""That's why it wasn't radioactive. No fuel. Gravitic."Gatis nodded his head. "What we were told to watch for, right?""Right.""And you got it. Leave it to you to be the lucky one.""Not so lucky. A woman without identification was on it and Ididn't report her."" What? Look, don't tell me . I don't wantto know about it. Not another word. You may be a pal, but I'm not goingto make myself an accomplice after the fact.""I'm not worried about that. Not very much. I had tosend the ship down. They want that gravitic or any gravitic. Youknow that.""Sure, but you could at least have reported the woman.""Didn't like to. She's not married. She was just picked upfor for use.""How many men on board?""Two.""And they just picked her up for for that. They must be fromTerminus.""That's right.""They don't care what they do on Terminus.""That's right.""Disgusting. And they get away with it.""One of them was married, and he didn't want his wife to know. If Ireported her, his wife would find out.""Wouldn't she be back on Terminus?""Of course, but she'd find out anyway.""Serve the fellow right if his wife did find out.""I agree but I can't be the one to be responsiblefor it.""They'll hammer you for not reporting it. Not wanting to make troublefor a guy is no excuse.""Would you have reported him?""I'd have had to, I suppose.""No, you wouldn't. The government wants that ship. If I had insistedon putting the woman on report, the men on the ship would have changedtheir minds about landing and would have pulled away to some otherplanet. The government wouldn't have wanted that.""But will they believe you?""I think so. A very cute-looking woman, too. Imagine a womanlike that being willing to come along with two men, and married men withthe nerve to take advantage. You know, it's tempting.""I don't think you'd want the missus to know you said that oreven thought that."Kendray said defiantly, "Who's going to tell her? You?""Come on. You know better than that." Gatis's look of indignationfaded quickly, and he said, "It's not going to do those guys any good,you know, you letting them through.""I know.""The people down surface-way will find out soon enough, and even ifyou get away with it, they won't.""I know," said Kendray, "but I'm sorry for them. Whatever troublethe woman will make for them will be as nothing to what the ship willmake for them. The captain made a few remarks "Kendray paused, and Gatis said eagerly, "Like what?""Never mind," said Kendray. "If it comes out, it's my butt.""I'm not going to repeat it.""Neither am I. But I'm sorry for those two men from Terminus."15To anyone who has been in space and experienced itschangelessness, the real excitement of space flight comes when it istime to land on a new planet. The ground speeds backward under you asyou catch glimpses of land and water, of geometrical areas and linesthat might represent fields and roads. You become aware of the green ofgrowing things, the gray of concrete, the brown of bare ground, the whiteof snow. Most of all, there is the excitement of populated conglomerates;cities which, on each world, have their own characteristic geometry andarchitectural variants.
In an ordinary ship, there would have been the excitement oftouching down and skimming across a runway. For the Far Star ,it was different. It floated through the air, was slowed by skillfullybalancing air resistance and gravity, and finally made to come to restabove the spaceport. The wind was gusty and that introduced an addedcomplication. The Far Star , when adjusted to low response togravitational pull, was not only abnormally low in weight, but in massas well. If its mass were too close to zero, the wind would blow it awayrapidly. Hence, gravitational response had to be raised and jetthrustshad to be delicately used not only against the planet's pull but againstthe wind's push, and in a manner that matched the shift in wind intensityclosely. Without an adequate computer, it could not possibly have beendone properly.
Downward and downward, with small unavoidable shifts in this directionand that, drifted the ship until it finally sank into the outlined areathat marked its assigned position in the port.
The sky was a pale blue, intermingled with flat white, when the FarStar landed. The wind remained gusty even at ground level and thoughit was now no longer a navigational peril, it produced a chill thatTrevize winced at. He realized at once that their clothing supply wastotally unsuited to Comporellian weather.
Pelorat, on the other hand, looked about with appreciation and drewhis breath deeply through his nose with relish, liking the bite ofthe cold, at least for the moment. He even deliberately unseamed hiscoat in order to feel the wind against his chest. In a little while,he knew, he would seam up again and adjust his scarf, but for now hewanted to feel the existence of an atmosphere. One neverdid aboard ship.
Bliss drew her coat closely about herself, and, with gloved hands,dragged her hat down to cover her ears. Her face was crumpled in miseryand seemed close to tears.
She muttered, "This world is evil. It hates and mistreats us.""Not at all, Bliss dear," said Pelorat earnestly. "I'm sure theinhabitant; like this world, and that it uh likes them,if you want to put it that way. We'll be indoors soon enough, and itwill be warm there."Almost as an afterthought, he flipped one side of his coat outwardcurved it about her, while she snuggled against his shirtfront.
Trevize did his best to ignore the temperature. He obtained a mapcard from the port authority, checking it on his pocket computer tosure that it gave the necessary details his aisle and lot number,the and engine number of his ship, and so on. He checked once more tosure that the ship was tightly secured, and then took out the maximuminsurance allowed against the chance of misadventure (useless, actually,the Far Star should be invulnerable at the likely Comporellianlevel of technology, and was entirely irreplaceable at whatever price,if it were not).
Trevize found the taxi-station where it ought to be. (A number offacilities at spaceports were standardized in position, appearance,and manner of use. They had to be, in view of the multiworld nature ofthe clientele.)He signaled for a taxi, punching out the destination merely as"City."A taxi glided up to them on diamagnetic skis, drifting slightlyunder the impulse of the wind, and trembling under the vibration of itsnot-quite-silent engine. It was a dark gray in color and bore its whitetaxi-insignia on tell doors. The taxi-driver was wearing a dark coatand a white, furred bat.
Pelorat, becoming aware, said softly, "The planetary decor seem tobe black and white."Trevize said, "It may be more lively in the city proper."The driver spoke into a small microphone, perhaps in order to avoidopening the window. "Going to the city, folks?"There was a gentle singsong to his Galactic dialect that was ratherattractive, and he was not hard to understand always a relief ona new world,Trevize said, "That's right," and the rear door slid open.
Bliss entered, followed by Pelorat, and then by Trevize. The doorclosed and warm air welled upward.
Bliss rubbed her hands and breathed a long sigh of relief.
The taxi pulled out slowly, and the driver said, "That ship you camein is gravitic, isn't it?"Trevize said dryly, "Considering the way it came down, would youdoubt it?"The driver said, "Is it from Terminus, then?"Trevize said, "Do you know any other world that could build one?"The driver seemed to digest that as the taxi took on speed. He thensaid, "Do you always answer a question with a question?"Trevize couldn't resist. "Why not?""In that case, how would you answer me if I asked if your name wereGolan Trevize?""I would answer: What makes you ask?"The taxi came to a halt at the outskirts of the spaceport and thedriver said, "Curiosity! I ask again: Are you Golan Trevize?"Trevize's voice became stiff and hostile. "What business is thatof yours?""My friend," said the driver, "We're not moving till you answer thequestion. And if you don't answer in a clear yes or no in about twoseconds, I'm turning the heat off in the passenger compartment and we'llkeep on waiting. Are you Golan Trevize, Councilman of Terminus? If youranswer is in the negative, you will have to show me your identificationpapers."Trevize said, "Yes, I am Golan Trevize, and as a Councilman of theFoundation, I expect to be treated with all the courtesy due my rank. Yourfailure to do so will have you in hot water, fellow. Now what?""Now we can proceed a little more lightheartedly." The taxi beganto move again. "I choose my passengers carefully, and I had expected topick up two men only. The woman was a surprise and I might have made amistake. As it is, if I have you, then I can leave it to you to explainthe woman when you reach your destination.""You don't know my destination.""As it happens, I do. You're going to the Department ofTransportation.""That's not where I want to go.""That matters not one little bit, Councilman. If I were a taxi-driver,I'd take you where you want to go. Since I'm not, I take you whereI want you to go.""Pardon me," said Pelorat, leaning forward, "you certainly seem tobe a taxi-driver. You're driving a taxi.""Anyone might drive a taxi. Not everyone has a license to do so. Andnot every car that looks like a taxi is a taxi."Trevize said, "Let's stop playing games. Who are you and whatare you doing? Remember that you'll have to account for this to theFoundation.""Not I," said the driver, "My superiors, perhaps. I'm an agent ofthe Comporellian Security Force. I am under orders to treat you with alldue respect to your rank, but you must go where I take you. And be verycareful how you react, for this vehicle is armed, and I am under ordersto defend myself against attack."16The vehicle, having reached cruising speed, moved withabsolute, smooth quiet, and Trevize sat there in quietness as frozen. Hewas aware, without actually looking, of Pelorat glancing at him now andthen with a look of uncertainty on his face, a "What do we do now? Pleasetell me" look.
Bliss, a quick glance told him, sat calmly, apparently unconcerned. Ofcourse, she was a whole world in herself. All of Gaia, though it mightbe at Galactic distances, was wrapped up in her skin. She had resourcesthat could be called on in a true emergency.
But, then, what had happened?
Clearly, the official at the entry station, following routine, hadsent down his report omitting Bliss and it had attractedthe interest of the security people and, of all things, the Departmentof Transportation. Why?
It was peacetime and he knew of no specific tensions betweenComporellon and the Foundation. He himself was an important Foundationofficial Wait, he had told the official at the entry station Kendray,his name had been that he was on important business with theComporellian government. He had stressed that in his attempt to getthrough. Kendray must have reported that as well and that would rouse all sorts of interest.
He hadn't anticipated that, and he certainly should have.
What, then, about his supposed gift of rightness? Was he beginningto believe that he was the black box that Gaia thought he was orsaid it thought he was. Was he being led into a quagmire by the growthof an overconfidence built on superstition?
How could he for one moment be trapped in that folly? Had he never inhit life been wrong? Did he know what the weather would be tomorrow? Didhe win large amounts in games of chance? The answers were no, no,and no.
Well, then, was it only in the large, inchoate things that he wasalways right? How could he tell?
Forget that! After all, the mere fact that he had stated hehad important state business no, it was "Foundation security"that he had said Well, then, the mere fact that he was there on a matter of Foundationsecurity, coming, as he had, secretly and unheralded, would surelyattract their attention. Yes, but until they knew what it was allabout they would surely act with the utmost circumspection. They would beceremonious and treat him as a high dignitary. They would not kidnap him and make use of threats.
Yet that was exactly what they had done. Why?
What made them feel strong enough and powerful enough to treat aCouncilman of Terminus in such a fashion?
Could it be Earth? Was the same force that hid the world of origin soeffectively, even against the great mentalists of the Second Foundation,now working to circumvent his search for Earth in the very first stageof that search? Was Earth omniscient? Omipotent?
Trevize shook his head. That way lay paranoia. Was he going toblame Earth for everything? Was every quirk of behavior, every bend inthe road, every twist of circumstance, to be the result of the secretmachinations of Earth? As soon as he began to think in that fashion,he was defeated.
At that point, he felt the vehicle decelerating and was brought backto reality at a stroke.
It occurred to him that he had never, even for one moment, lookedat the city through which they had been passing. He looked about now, atouch wildly. The buildings were low, but it was a cold planet mostof the structures were probably underground.
He saw no trace of color and that seemed against human nature.
Occasionally, he could see a person pass, well bundled. But,then, the people, like the buildings themselves, were probably mostlyunderground.
The taxi had stopped before a low, broad building, set in a depression,the bottom of which Trevize could not see. Some moments passed and itcontinued to remain there, the driver himself motionless as well. Histall, white hat nearly touched the roof of the vehicle.
Trevize wondered fleetingly how the driver managed to step in andout of the vehicle without knocking his hat off, then said, with thecontrolled anger one would expect of a haughty and mistreated official,"Well, driver, what now?"The Comporellian version of the glittering field-partition thatseparated the driver from the passengers was not at all primitive. Soundwaves could pass through though Trevize was quite certain thatmaterial objects, at reasonable energies, could not.
The driver said, "Someone will be up to get you. Just sit back andtake it easy."Even as he said this, three heads appeared in a slow, smooth ascentfrom the depression in which the building rested. After that, therecame the rest of the bodies. Clearly, the newcomers were moving up theequivalent of an escalator, but Trevize could not see the details ofthe device from where he sat.
As the three approached, the passenger door of the taxi opened anda flood of cold air swept inward.
Trevize stepped out, seaming his coat to the neck. The other twofollowed him Bliss with considerable reluctance.
The three Comporellians were shapeless, wearing garments that balloonedoutward and were probably electrically heated. Trevize felt scorn atthat. There was little use for such things on Terminus, and the onetime he had borrowed a heat-coat during winter on the nearby planetof Anacreon, he discovered it had a tendency to grow warmer at a slowrate so that by the time he realized he was too warm he was perspiringuncomfortably.
As the Comporellians approached, Trevize noted with a distinct senseof indignation that they were armed. Nor did they try to conceal thefact. Quite the contrary. Each had a blaster in a holster attached tothe outer garment.
One of the Comporellians, having stepped up to confront Trevize, saidgruffly, "Your pardon, Councilman," and then pulled his coat open withrough movement. He had inserted questing hands which moved quickly upand down Trevize's sides, back, chest, and thighs. The coat was shakenand felt. Trevize was too overcome by confused astonishment to realizehe had been rapidly and efficiently searched till it was over.
Pelorat, his chin drawn down and his mouth in a twisted grimace, wasundergoing a similar indignity at the hands of a second Comporellian.
The third was approaching Bliss, who did not wait to be touched. She,at least, knew what to expect, somehow, for she whipped off her coat and,for a moment, stood there in her light clothing, exposed to the whistleof the wind.
She said, freezingly enough to match the temperature, "You can seeI'm not armed."And indeed anyone could. The Comporellian shook the coat, as thoughby its weight he could tell if it contained a weapon perhaps hecould and retreated.
Bliss put on her coat again, huddling into it, and for a momentTrevize admired her gesture. He knew how she felt about the cold, butshe had not allowed a tremor or shiver to escape her as she had stoodthere in thin blouse and slacks. (Then he wondered if, in the emergency,she might not have drawn warmth from the rest of Gaia.)One of the Comporellians gestured, and the three Outworlders followedhim. The other two Comporellians fell behind. The one or two pedestrianswho were on the street did not bother to watch what was happening. Eitherthey were too accustomed to the sight or, more likely, had their mindsoccupied with getting to some indoor destination as soon as possible.
Trevize saw now that it was a moving ramp up which the Comporellianshad ascended. They were descending now, all six of them, and pastedthrough a lock arrangement almost as complicated as that on aspaceship to keep heat inside, no doubt, rather than air.
And then, at once, they were inside a huge building.


Chapter 5: Struggle for the Ship
17Trevize's first impression was that he was on the set ofa hyperdrama specifically, that of a historical romance of Imperialdays. There was a particular set, with few variations (perhaps only oneexisted and was used by every hyperdrama producer, for all he knew),that represented the great world-girdling planet-city of Trantor inits prime.
There were the large spaces, the busy scurry of pedestrians, thesmall vehicles speeding along the lanes reserved for them.
Trevize looked up, almost expecting to see air-taxis climbing into dimvaulted recesses, but that at least was absent. In fact, as his initialastonishment subsided, it was clear that the building was far smallerthan one would expect on Trantor. It was only a buildingand not part of a complex that stretched unbroken for thousands of milesin every direction.
The colors were different, too. On the hyperdramas, Trantor wasalways depicted as impossibly garish in coloring and the clothing was,if taken literally, thoroughly impractical and unserviceable. However,all those colors and frills were meant to serve a symbolic purpose forthey indicated the decadence (a view that was obligatory, these days)of the Empire, and of Trantor particularly.
If that were so, however, Comporellon was the very reverse of decadent,for the color scheme that Pelorat had remarked upon at the spaceportwas here borne out.
The walls were in shades of gray, the ceilings white, the clothingof the population in black, gray, and white. Occasionally, there was anall-black costume; even more occasionally, an all-gray; never an all-whitethat Trevize could see. The pattern was always different, however,as though people, deprived of color, still managed, irrepressibly,to find ways of asserting individuality.
Faces tended to be expressionless or, if not that, then grim. Womenwore their hair short; men longer, but pulled backward into shortqueues. No one looked at anyone else as he or she passed. Everyone seemedto breathe a purposefulness, as though there was definite businesson each mind and room for nothing else. Men and women dressed alike,with only length of hair and the slight bulge of breast and width ofhip marking the difference.
The three were guided into an elevator that went down fivelevels. There they emerged and were moved on to a door on which thereappeared in small and unobtrusive lettering, white on gray, "MitzaLizalor, MinTrans."The Comporellian in the lead touched the lettering, which, after amoment, glowed in response. The door opened and they walked in.
It was a large room and rather empty, the bareness of content serving,perhaps, as a kind of conspicuous consumption of space designed to showthe power of the occupant.
Two guards stood against the far wall, faces expressionless andeyes firmly fixed on those entering. A large desk filled the center ofthe room, set perhaps just a little back of center. Behind the deskwas, presumably, Mitza Lizalor, large of body, smooth of face, darkof eyes. Two strong and capable hands with long, square-ended fingersrested on the desk.
The MinTrans (Minister of Transportation, Trevize assumed) had thelapels of the outer garment a broad and dazzling white against thedark gray of the rest of the costume. The double bar of white extendeddiagonally below the lapels, across the garment itself and crossing atthe center of the chest. Trevize could see that although the garment wascut in such a fashion as to obscure the swelling of a woman's breastson either side, the white X called attention to them.
The Minister was undoubtedly a woman. Even if her breasts were ignored,her short hair showed it, and though there was no makeup on her face,her features showed it, too.
Her voice, too, was indisputably feminine, a rich contralto.
She said, "Good afternoon. It is not often that we are honoredby a visit of men from Terminus. And of an unreported woman aswell." Her eyes passed from one to another, then settled on Trevize,who was standing stiffly and frowningly erect. "And one of the men amember of the Council, too.""A Councilman of the Foundation," said Trevize, trying to makehis voice ring. "Councilman Golan Trevize on a mission from theFoundation.""On a mission?" The Minister's eyebrows rose.
"On a mission," repeated Trevize. "Why, then, are we being treated asfelons? Why have we been taken into custody by armed guards and broughthere as prisoners? The Council of the Foundation, I hope you understand,will not be pleased to hear of this.""And in any case," said Bliss, her voice seeming a touch shrill incomparison with that of the older woman, "are we to remain standingindefinitely?"The Minister gazed coolly at Bliss for a long moment, then raised anarm and said, "Three chairs! Now!"A door opened and three men, dressed in the usual somber Comporellianfashion, brought in three chairs at a semitrot. The three people standingbefore the desk sat down.
"There," said the Minister, with a wintry smile, "are wecomfortable?"Trevize thought not. The chairs were uncushioned, cold to the touch,flat of surface and back, making no compromise with the shape of thebody. He said, "Why are we here?"The Minister consulted papers lying on her desk. "I will explainas soon as I am certain of my facts. Your ship is the Far Star out of Terminus. Is that correct, Councilman?""It is."The Minister looked up. "I used your title, Councilman. Will you,as a courtesy, use mine?""Would Madam Minister be sufficient? Or is there an honorific?""No honorific, sir, and you need not double your words. `Minister'
is sufficient, or `Madam' if you weary of repetition.""Then my answer to your question is: It is, Minister.""The captain of the ship is Golan Trevize, citizen of the Foundationand member of the Council on Terminus a freshman Councilman,actually. And you are Trevize. Am I correct in all this, Councilman?""You are, Minister. And since I am a citizen of theFoundation ""I am not yet done, Councilman. Save your objections till Iam. Accompanying you is Janov Pelorat, scholar, historian, and citizenof the Foundation. And that is you, is it not, Dr. Pelorat?"Pelorat could not suppress a slight start as the Minister turnedher keen glance on him. He said, "Yes, it is, my d " He paused,and began again, "Yes, it is, Minister."The Minister clasped her hands stiffly. "There is no mention in thereport that has been forwarded to me of a woman. Is this woman a memberof the ship's complement?""She is, Minister," said Trevize.
"Then I address myself to the woman. Your name?""I am known as Bliss," said Bliss, sitting erectly and speakingwith calm clarity, "though my full name is longer, madam. Do you wishit all?""I will be content with Bliss for the moment. Are you a citizen ofthe Foundation, Bliss?""I am not, madam.""Of what world are you a citizen, Bliss?""I have no documents attesting to citizenship with respect to anyworld, madam.""No papers, Bliss?" She made a small mark on the papers beforeher. "That fact is noted. What is it you are doing on board the ship?""I am a passenger, madam.""Did either Councilman Trevize or Dr. Pelorat ask to see your papersbefore you boarded, Bliss?""No, madam.""Did you inform them that you were without papers, Bliss?""No, madam.""What is your function on board ship, Bliss? Does your name suityour function?"Bliss said proudly, "I am a passenger and have no other function."Trevize broke in. "Why are you badgering this woman, Minister? Whatlaw has she broken?"Minister Lizalor's eyes shifted from Bliss to Trevize. She said, "Youare an Outworlder, Councilman, and do not know our laws. Nevertheless,you are subject to them if you choose to visit our world. You do notbring your laws with you; that is a general rule of Galactic law,I believe.""Granted, Minister, but that doesn't tell me which of your laws shehas broken.""It is a general rule in the Galaxy, Councilman, that a visitor froma world outside the dominions of the world she is visiting have heridentification papers with her. Many worlds are lax in this respect,valuing tourism, or indifferent to the rule of order. We of Comporellonare not. We are a world of law and rigid in its application. She is aworldless person, and as such, breaks our law."Trevize said, "She had no choice in the matter. I was piloting theship, and I brought it down to Comporellon. She had to accompany us,Minister, or do you suggest she should have asked to be jettisonedin space?""This merely means that you, too, have broken our law, Councilman.""No, that is not so, Minister. I am not an Outworlder. I am a citizenof the Foundation, and Comporellon and the worlds subject to it arean Associated Power of the Foundation. As a citizen of the Foundation,I can travel freely here.""Certainly, Councilman, as long as you have documentation to provethat you are indeed a citizen of the Foundation.""Which I do, Minister.""Yet even as citizen of the Foundation, you do not have the right tobreak our law by bringing a worldless person with you."Trevize hesitated. Clearly, the border guard, Kendray, had notkept faith with him, so there was no point in protecting him. He said,"We were not stopped at the immigration station and I considered thatimplicit permission to bring this woman with me, Minister.""It is true you were not stopped, Councilman. It is true thewoman war not reported by the immigration authorities and was passedthrough. I can suspect, however, that the officials at the entry stationdecided and quite correctly that it was more important to getyour ship to the surface than to worry about a worldless person. Whatthey did was, strictly speaking, an infraction of the rules, and thematter will have to be dealt with in the proper fashion, but I have nodoubt that the decision will be that the infraction was justified. Weare a world of rigid law, Councilman, but we are not rigid beyond thedictates of reason."Trevize said at once, "Then I call upon reason to bend your rigor now,Minister. If, indeed, you received no information from the immigrationstation to the effect that a worldless person was on board ship, then youhad no knowledge that we were breaking any law at the time we landed. Yetit is quite apparent that you were prepared to take us into custodythe moment we landed, and you did, in fact, do so. Why did you do so,when you had no reason to think any law was being broken?"The Minister smiled. "I understand your confusion, Councilman. Pleaselet me assure you that whatever knowledge we had gained or had notgained as to the worldless condition of your passenger had nothingto do with your being taken into custody. We are acting on behalf of theFoundation, of which, as you point out, we are an Associated Power."Trevize stared at her. "But that's impossible, Minister. It's evenworse. It's ridiculous."The Minister's chuckle was like the smooth flow of honey. She said,"I am interested in the way you consider it worse to be ridiculous thanimpossible, Councilman. I agree with you there. Unfortunately for you,however, it is neither. Why should it be?""Because I am an official of the Foundation government, on a missionfor them, and it is absolutely inconceivable that they would wish toarrest me, or that they would even have the power to do so, since I havelegislative immunity.""Ah, you omit my title, but you are deeply moved and that is perhapsforgivable. Still, I am not asked to arrest you directly. I do so onlythat I may carry out what I am asked to do, Councilman.""Which is, Minister?" said Trevize, trying to keep his emotion undercontrol in the face of this formidable woman.
"Which is to commandeer your ship, Councilman, and return it to theFoundation.""What?""Again you omit my title, Councilman. That is very slipshod of youand no way to press your own case. The ship is not yours, I presume. Wasit designed by you, or built by you, or paid for by you?""Of course not, Minister. It was assigned to me by the Foundationgovernment.""Then, presumably, the Foundation government has the right to cancelthat assignment, Councilman. It is a valuable ship, I imagine."Trevize did not answer.
The Minister said, "It is a gravitic ship, Councilman. There cannotbe many and even the Foundation must have but a very few. They mustregret having assigned one of those very few to you. Perhaps you canpersuade them to assign you another and less valuable ship that willnevertheless amply, suffice for your mission. But we must havethe ship in which you have arrived.""No, Minister, I cannot give up the ship. I cannot believe theFoundation asks it of you."The Minister smiled. "Not of me solely, Councilman. Not of Comporellon,specifically. We have reason to believe that the request was sent out toevery one of the many worlds and regions under Foundation jurisdictionor association. From this, I deduce that the Foundation does not knowyour itinerary and is seeking you with a certain angry vigor. From whichI further deduce that you have no mission to deal with Comporellon onbehalf of the Foundation since in that case they would know whereyou were and deal with us specifically. In short, Councilman, you havebeen lying to me."Trevize said, with a certain difficulty, "I would like to see a copyof request you have received from the Foundation government, Minister. Ientitled, I think, to that.""Certainly, if all this comes to legal action. We take our legal formsvery seriously, Councilman, and your rights will be fully protected,I assure you. It would be better and easier, however, if we come to anagreement here without the publicity and delay of legal action. We wouldprefer that, and, I am certain, so would the Foundation, which cannotwish the Galaxy at large to know of a runaway Legislator. That would putthe Foundation in a ridiculous light, and, by your estimate and mine,that would be worse than impossible."Trevize was again silent.
The Minister waited a moment, then went on, as imperturbable asever. "Come, Councilman, either way, by informal agreement or by legalaction, we intend to have the ship. The penalty for bringing in aworldless passenger will depend on which route we take. Demand the lawand she will represent an additional point against you and you will allsuffer the full punishment for the crime, and that will not be light,I assure you. Come to an agreement, and your passenger can be sent awayby commercial flight to any destination she wishes, and, for that matter,you two can accompany her, if you wish. Or, if the Foundation is willing,we can supply you with one of our own ships, a perfectly adequateone, provided, of course, that the Foundation will replace it with anequivalent ship of their own. Or, if, for any reason, you do not wish toreturn to Foundation-controlled territory, we might be willing to offeryou refuge here and, perhaps, eventual Comporellian citizenship. You see,you have many possibilities of gain if you come to a friendly arrangement,but none at all if you insist on your legal rights."Trevize said, "Minister, you are too eager. You promise what you cannotdo. You cannot offer me refuge in the face of a Foundation request thatI be delivered to them."The Minister said, "Councilman, I never promise what I cannot do. TheFoundation's request is only for the ship. They make no request concerningyou as an individual, or for anyone else on the ship. Their sole requestis for the vessel."Trevize glanced quickly at Bliss, and said, "May I have yourpermission, Minister, to consult with Dr. Pelorat and Miss Bliss for ashort while?""Certainly, Councilman. You may have fifteen minutes.""Privately, Minister.""You will be led to a room and, after fifteen minutes, you will be ledback, Councilman. You will not be interfered with while you are therenor will we attempt to monitor your conversation. You have my word onthat and I keep my word. However, you will be adequately guarded so donot be so foolish as to think of escaping.""We understand, Minister.""And when you come back, we will expect your free agreement to giveup the ship. Otherwise, the law will take its course, and it will bemuch the worse for all of you, Councilman. Is that understood?""That is understood, Minister," said Trevize, keeping his rage undertight control, since its expression would do him no good at all.
18It was a small room, but it was well lighted. Itcontained a couch and two chairs, and one could hear the soft sound ofa ventilating fan. On the whole, it was clearly more comfortable thanthe Minister's large and sterile office.
A guard had led them there, grave and tall, his hand hovering nearthe butt of his blaster. He remained outside the door as they enteredand said, in a heavy voice, "You have fifteen minutes."He had no sooner said that than the door slid shut, with a thud.
Trevize said, "I can only hope that we can't be overheard."Pelorat said, "She did give us her word, Golan.""You judge others by yourself, Janov. Her so-called `word' will notsuffice. She will break it without hesitation if she wants to.""It doesn't matter," said Bliss. "I can shield this place.""You have a shielding device?" asked Pelorat.
Bliss smiled, with a sudden flash of white teeth. "Gaia's mind is ashielding device, Pel. It's an enormous mind.""We are here," said Trevize angrily, "because of the limitations ofthat enormous mind.""What do you mean?" said Bliss.
"When the triple confrontation broke up, you withdrew me from theminds of both the Mayor and that Second Foundationer, Gendibal. Neitherwas to think of me again, except distantly and indifferently. I was tobe left to myself.""We had to do that," said Bliss. "You are our most importantresource.""Yes. Golan Trevize, the ever-right. But you did not withdraw my shipfrom their minds, did you? Mayor Branno did not ask for me; she had nointerest in me, but she did ask for the ship. She has notforgotten the ship."Bliss frowned.
Trevize said, "Think about it. Gaia casually assumed that I included myship; that we were a unit. If Branno didn't think of me, she wouldn'tthink of the ship. The trouble is that Gaia doesn't understandindividuality. It thought of the ship and me as a single organism,and it was wrong to think that."Bliss said softly, "That is possible.""Well, then," said Trevize flatly, "it's up to you to rectify thatmistake. I must have my gravitic ship and my computer. Nothing elsewill do. Therefore, Bliss, make sure that I keep the ship. You cancontrol minds.""Yes, Trevize, but we do not exercise that control lightly. Wedid it in connection with the triple confrontation, but do youknow how long that confrontation was planned? Calculated? Weighed?
It took literally many years. I cannot simply walk up to awoman and adjust the mind to suit someone's convenience.""Is this a time "Bliss went on forcefully. "If I began to follow such a course ofaction, where do we stop? I might have influenced the agent's mind atthe entry station and we would have passed through at once. I mighthave influenced the agent's mind in the vehicle, and he would have letus go.""Well, since you mention it, why didn't you do these things?""Because we don't know where it would lead. We don't know the sideeffects, which may well turn out to make the situation worse. If I adjustthe Minister's mind now, that will affect her dealings with others withwhom she will come in contact and, since she is a high official in hergovernment, it may affect interstellar relations. Until such time asthe matter is thoroughly worked out, we dare not touch her mind.""Then why are you with us?""Because the time may come when your life is threatened. I must protectyour life at all costs, even at the cost of my Pel or of myself. Yourlife was not threatened at the entry station. It is not threatenednow. You must work this out for yourself, and do so at least until Gaiacan estimate the consequence of some sort of action and take it."Trevize fell into a period of thought. Then he said, "In that case,I have to try something. It may not work."The door moved open, thwacking into its socket as noisily as ithad closed.
The guard said, "Come out."As they emerged, Pelorat whispered, "What are you going to do,Golan?"Trevize shook his head and whispered, "I'm not entirely sure. I willhave to improvise."19Minister Lizalor was still at her desk when they returnedto her office. Her face broke into a grim smile as they walked in.
She said, "I trust, Councilman Trevize, that you have returned totell me that you are giving up this Foundation ship you have.""I have come, Minister," said Trevize calmly, "to discuss terms.""There are no terms to discuss, Councilman. A trial, if you insiston one, can be arranged very quickly and would be carried through evenmore quickly. I guarantee your conviction even in a perfectly fairtrial since your guilt in bringing in a worldless person is obviousand indisputable. After that, we will be legally justified in seizingthe ship and you three would suffer heavy penalties. Don't force thosepenalties on yourself just to delay us for a day.""Nevertheless, there are terms to discuss, Minister, because nomatter how quickly you convict us, you cannot seize the ship without myconsent. Any attempt you make to force your way into the ship withoutme will destroy it, and the spaceport with it, and every human beingin the spaceport. This will surely infuriate the Foundation, somethingyou dare not do. Threatening us or mistreating us in order to forceme to open the ship is surely against your law, and if you break yourown law in desperation and subject us to torture or even to a periodof cruel and unusual imprisonment, the Foundation will find out aboutit and they will be even more furious. However much they want the shipthey cannot allow a precedent that would permit the mistreatment ofFoundation citizens. Shall we talk terms?""This is all nonsense," said the Minister, scowling. "If necessary,we will call in the Foundation itself. They will know how to open theirown ship, or they will force you to open it."Trevize said, "You do not use my title, Minister, but you areemotionally moved, so that is perhaps forgivable. You know that thevery last thing you will do is call in the Foundation, since you haveno intention of delivering the ship to them."The smile faded from the Minister's face. "What nonsense is this,Councilman?""The kind of nonsense, Minister, that others, perhaps, ought not tohear. Let my friend and the young woman go to some comfortable hotelroom and obtain the rest they need so badly and let your guards leave,too. They can remain just outside and you can have them leave you ablaster. You are not a small woman and, with a blaster, you have nothingto fear from me. I am unarmed."The Minister leaned toward him across the desk. "I have nothing tofear from you in any case."Without looking behind her, she beckoned to one of the guards, whoapproached at once and came to a halt at her side with a stamp of hisfeet. said, "Guard, take that one and that one to Suite 5. They are tostay there and to be made comfortable and to be well guarded. You willbe held responsible for any mistreatment they may receive, as well asfor any breach of security."She stood up, and not all of Trevize's determination to maintain anabsolute composure sufficed to keep him from flinching a little. Shewas tall; quite tall, at least, as Trevize's own 1.85 meters, perhaps acentimeter or so taller. She had a narrow waistline, with the two whitestrips across her chest continuing into an encirclement of her waist,making it look even narrower, There was a massive grace about her andTrevize thought ruefully that her statement that she had nothing tofear from him might well be correct. In a rough-and-tumble, he thought,she would have no trouble pinning his shoulders to the mat.
She said, "Come with me, Councilman. If you are going to talk nonsensethen, for your own sake, the fewer who hear you, the better."She led the way in a brisk stride, and Trevize followed, feelingshrunken in her massive shadow, a feeling he had never before had witha woman.
They entered an elevator and, as the door closed behind them, she said,"We are alone now and if you are under the illusion, Councilman, thatYou can use force with me in order to accomplish some imagined purpose,please forget that." The singsong in her voice grew more pronounced as shesaid, with clear amusement, "You look like a reasonably strong specimen,but I assure you I will have no trouble in breaking your arm or yourback, if I must. I am armed, but I will not have to use any weapon."Trevize scratched at his cheek as his eyes drifted first down, thenup her body. "Minister, I can hold my own in a wrestling match with anyman my weight, but I have already decided to forfeit a bout with you. Iknow when I am outclassed.""Good," said the Minister, and looked pleased.
Trevize said, "Where are we going, Minister?""Down! Quite far down. Don't be upset, however. In the hyperdramas,this would be a preliminary to taking you to a dungeon, I suppose, butwe have no dungeons on Comporellon only reasonable prisons. Weare going to my private apartment; not as romantic as a dungeon in thebad old Imperial days, but more comfortable."Trevize estimated that they were at least fifty meters below thesurface of the planet, when the elevator door slid to one side and theystepped out.
20Trevize looked about the apartment with clearsurprise.
The Minister said grimly, "Do you disapprove of my living quarters,Councilman?""No, I have no reason to, Minister. I am merely surprised. I find itunexpected. The impression I had of your world from what little I sawand heard since arriving was that it was an aaaabstemious one,eschewing useless luxury.""So it is, Councilman. Our resources are limited, and our life mustbe as harsh as our climate.""But this, Minister," and Trevize held out both hands as thoughto embrace the room where, for the first time on this world, he sawcolor, where the couches were well cushioned, where the light from theilluminated walls was soft, and where the floor was force-carpeted sothat steps were springy and silent. "This is surely luxury.""We eschew, as you say, Councilman, useless luxury; ostentatiousluxury; wastefully excessive luxury. This, however, is private luxury,which has its use. I work hard and bear much responsibility. I need aplace where I can forget, for a while, the difficulties of my post."Trevize said, "And do all Comporellians live like this when the eyesof others are averted, Minister?""It depends on the degree of work and responsibility. Few can affordto, or deserve to, or, thanks to our code of ethics, want to.""But you, Minister, can afford to, deserve to and want to?"The Minister said, "Rank has its privileges as well as its duties. Andnow sit down, Councilman, and tell me of this madness of yours." Shesat down on the couch, which gave slowly under her solid weight, andpointed to an equally soft chair in which Trevize would be facing herat not too great a distance."Trevize sat down. "Madness, Minister?"The Minister relaxed visibly, leaning her right elbow on apillow. "In private conversation, we need not observe the rules of formaldiscourse too punctiliously. You may call me Lizalor. I will call you,Trevize. Tell me what is on your mind, Trevize, and let us inspectit."Trevize crossed his legs and sat back in his chair. "See here, Lizalor,you gave me the choice of either agreeing to give up the ship voluntarily,or of being subjected to a formal trial. In both cases, you would end upwith the ship. Yet you have been going out of your way to persuademe to adopt the former alternative. You are willing to offer me anothership to replace mine, so that my friends and I might go anywhere wechose. We might even stay here on Comporellon and qualify for citizenship,if we chose. In smaller things, you were willing to allow me fifteenminutes to consult with my friends. You were even willing to bring mehere to your private apartment, while my friends are now, presumably,in comfortable quarters. In short, you are bribing me, Lizalor, ratherdesperately, to grant you the ship without the necessity of a trial.""Come, Trevize, are you in no mood to give me credit for humaneimpulses?""None.""Or the thought that voluntary surrender would be quicker and moreconvenient than a trial would be?""No! I would offer a different suggestion.""Which is?""A trial has one thing in its strong disfavor; it is a publicaffair. You have several times referred to this world's rigorous legalsystem, and I suspect it would be difficult to arrange a trial withoutits being fully recorded. If were so, the Foundation would know of itand you would have to hand the ship to it once the trial was over.""Of course," said Lizalor, without expression. "It is the Foundationowns the ship.""But," said Trevize, "a private agreement with me would not haveto be placed on formal record. You could have the ship and, since theFoundation would not know of the matter they don't even know thatwe are on this world Comporellon could keep the ship. That, I amsure, is what you intend to do.""Why should we do that?" She was still without expression. "Are wenot part of the Foundation Confederation?""Not quite. Your status is that of an Associated Power. In any map onwhich the member worlds of the Federation are shown in red, Comporellonand its dependent worlds would show up as a patch of pale pink.""Even so, as an Associated Power, we would surely co-operate withthe Foundation.""Would you? Might not Comporellon be dreaming of total independence;even leadership? You are an old world. Almost all worlds claim to beolder than they are, but Comporellon is an old world."Minister Lizalor allowed a cold smile to cross her face. "The oldest,if some of our enthusiasts are to be believed.""Might there not have been a time when Comporellon was indeed theleading world of a relatively small group of worlds? Might you not stilldream of recovering that lost position of power?""Do you think we dream of so impossible a goal? I called it madnessbefore I knew your thoughts, and it is certainly madness now thatI do.""Dreams may be impossible, yet still be dreamed. Terminus, locatedat the very edge of the Galaxy and with a five-century history that isbriefer than that of any other world, virtually rules the Galaxy. Andshall Comporellon not? Eh?" Trevize was smiling.
Lizalor remained grave. "Terminus reached that position, we are givento understand, by the working out of Hari Seldon's Plan.""That is the psychological buttress of its superiority and it willhold only as long, perhaps, as people believe it. It may be that theComporellian government does not believe it. Even so, Terminus also enjoysa technological buttress. Terminus's hegemony over the Galaxy undoubtedlyrests on its advanced technology of which the gravitic ship you areso anxious to have is an example. No other world but Terminus disposesof gravitic ships. If Comporellon could have one, and could learn itsworkings in detail, it would be bound to have taken a giant technologicalstep forward. I don't think it would be sufficient to help you overcomeTerminus's lead, but your government might think so."Lizalor said, "You can't be serious in this. Any government that keptthe ship in the face of the Foundation's desire to have it would surelyexperience the Foundation's wrath, and history shows that the Foundationcan be quite uncomfortably wrathful."Trevize said, "The Foundation's wrath would only be exerted if theFoundation knew there was something to be wrathful about.""In that case; Trevize if we assume your analysis of thesituation is something other than mad would it not be to yourbenefit to give us the ship and drive a hard bargain? We would paywell for the chance of having it quietly, according to your line ofargument.""Could you then rely on my not reporting the matter to theFoundation?""Certainly. Since you would have to report your own part in it.""I could report having acted under duress.""Yes. Unless your good sense told you that your Mayor would neverbelieve that. Come, make a deal."Trevize shook his head. "I will not, Madam Lizalor. The ship ismine and it must stay mine. As I have told you, it will blow up withextraordinary power if you attempt to force an entry. I assure you I amtelling you the truth. Don't rely on its being a bluff."" You could open it, and reinstruct the computer.""Undoubtedly, but I won't do that."Lizalor drew a heavy sigh. "You know we could make you change yourmind if not by what we could do to you, then by what we could doto your friend, Dr. Pelorat, or to the young woman.""Torture, Minister? Is that your law?""No, Councilman. But we might not have to do anything so crude. Thereis always the Psychic Probe."For the first time since entering the Minister's apartment, Trevizefelt an inner chill.
"You can't do that either. The use of the Psychic Probe for anythingbut medical purposes is outlawed throughout the Galaxy.""But if we are driven to desperation ""I am willing to chance that," said Trevize calmly, "for it woulddo you no good. My determination to retain my ship is so deep that thePsychic Probe would destroy my mind before it twisted it into givingit to you." ( That was a bluff, he thought, and the chillinside him deepened.) "And even if you were so skillful as to persuademe without destroying my mind and if I were to open the ship and disarmit and hand it over to you, it would still do you no good. The ship'scomputer is even more advanced than the ship is, and it is designedsomehow I don't know how to work at its full potential onlywith me. It is what I might call a one-person computer.""Suppose, then, you retained your ship, and remained its pilot. Wouldyou consider piloting it for us as an honored Comporelliancitizen? A large salary. Considerable luxury. Your friends, too.""No.""What is it you suggest? That we simply let you and your friendslaunch your ship and go off into the Galaxy? I warn you that before weallow you to do this, we might simply inform the Foundation that youare here with your ship, and leave all to them.""And lose the ship yourself?""If we must lose it, perhaps we would rather lose it to the Foundationthan to an impudent Outworlder.""Then let me suggest a compromise of my own.""A compromise? Well, I will listen. Proceed."Trevize said carefully, "I am on an important mission. It began withFoundation support. That support seems to have been suspended, but themission remains important. Let me have Comporellian support instead andif I complete the mission successfully, Comporellon will benefit." `Lizalor wore a dubious expression. "And you will not return the shipto the Foundation?""I have never planned to do that. The Foundation would not be searchingfor the ship so desperately if they thought there was anyintention of my casually returning it to them.""That is not quite the same thing as saying that you will give theship to us.""Once I have completed the mission, the ship may be of no furtheruse to me. In that case, I would not object to Comporellon having it."The two looked at each other in silence for a few moments.
Lizalor said, "You use the conditional. The ship `may be.' That isof no value to us.""I could make wild promises, but of what value would that be toyou? The fact that my promises are cautious and limited should show youthat they are at least sincere.""Clever," said Lizalor, nodding. "I like that. Well, what is yourmission and how might it benefit Comporellon?"Trevize said, "No, no, it is your turn. Will you support me if I showyou that the mission is of importance to Comporellon?"Minister Lizalor rose from the couch, a tall, overpoweringpresence. "I am hungry, Councilman Trevize, and I will get no further onan empty stomach. I will offer you something to eat and drink inmoderation. After that, we will finish the matter."And it seemed to Trevize that there was a rather carnivorous lookof anticipation about her at that moment, so that he tightened his lipswith just a bit of unease.
21The meal might have been a nourishing one, but it wasnot one to delight the palate. The main course consisted of boiled beefin a mustardy sauce, resting on a foundation of a leafy vegetable Trevizedid not recognize. Nor did he like it for it had a bitter-salty tastehe did not enjoy. He found out later it was a form of seaweed.
There was, afterward, a piece of fruit that tasted something likean apple tainted by peach (not bad, actually) and a hot, dark beveragethat was bitter enough for Trevize to leave half behind and ask if hemight have some cold water instead. The portions were all small, but,under the circumstances, Trevize did not mind.
The meal had been private, with no servants in view. The Minister hadherself heated and served the food, and herself cleared away the dishesand cutlery.
"I hope you found the meal pleasant," said Lizalor, as they left thedining room.
"Quite pleasant," said Trevize, without enthusiasm.
The Minister again took her seat on the couch. "Let us return then,"she said, "to our earlier discussion. You had mentioned that Comporellonmight resent the Foundation's lead in technology and its overlordship ofthe Galaxy. In a way that's true, but that aspect of the situation wouldinterest only those who are interested in interstellar politics, and theyare comparatively few. What is much more to the point is that the averageComporellian is horrified at the immorality of the Foundation. Thereis immorality in most worlds, but it seems most marked in Terminus. Iwould say that any anti-Terminus animus that exists on this world isrooted in that, rather than in more abstract matters.""Immorality?" said Trevize, puzzled. "Whatever the faults ofthe Foundation you have to admit it runs its part of the Galaxy withreasonable efficiency and fiscal honesty. Civil rights are, by and large,respected and ""Councilman Trevize, I speak of sexual morality.""In that case, I certainly don't understand you. We are a thoroughlymoral society, sexually speaking. Women are well represented in everyfacet of social life. Our Mayor is a woman and nearly half the Councilconsists of "The Minister allowed a look of exasperation to fleet across herface. "Councilman, are you mocking me? Surely you know what sexualmorality meant. Is, or is not, marriage a sacrament upon Terminus?""What do you mean by sacrament?""Is there a formal marriage ceremony binding a couple together?""Certainly, if people wish it. Such a ceremony simplifies tax problemsand inheritance.""But divorce can take place.""Of course. It would certainly be sexually immoral to keep peopletied to, each other, when ""Are there no religious restrictions?""Religious? There are people who make a philosophy out of ancientcults, but what has that to do with marriage?""Councilman, here on Comporellon, every aspect of sex is stronglycontrolled. It may not take place out of marriage. Its expression islimited even within marriage. We are sadly shocked at those worlds, atTerminus, particularly, where sex seems to be considered a mere socialpleasure of no great importance to be indulged in when, how, and withwhom one pleases without regard to the values of religion."Trevize shrugged. "I'm sorry, but I can't undertake to reform theGalaxy, or even Terminus and what has this to do with the matterof my ship?""I'm talking about public opinion in the matter of your ship and howit limits my ability to compromise the matter. The people of Comporellonwould be horrified if they found you had taken a young and attractivewoman on board to serve the lustful urges of you and your companion. Itis out consideration for the safety of the three of you that I have beenurging you to accept peaceful surrender in place of a public trial."Trevize said, "I see you have used the meal to think of a new typeof persuasion by threat. Am I now to fear a lynch mob?""I merely point out dangers. Will you be able to deny that thewoman you have taken on board ship is anything other than a sexualconvenience?""Of course I can deny it. Bliss is the companion of my friend,Dr. Pelorat. He has no other competing companion. You may not definetheir state as marriage, but I believe that in Pelorat's mind, and inthe woman's, too, there is a marriage between them.""Are you telling me you are not involved yourself?""Certainly not," said Trevize. "What do you take me for?""I cannot tell. I do not know your notions of morality.""Then let me explain that my notions of morality tell me that I don'ttrifle with my friend's possessions or his companionships.""You are not even tempted?""I can't control the fact of temptation, but there's no chance of mygiving in to it.""No chance at all? Perhaps you are not interested in women.""Don't you believe that. I am interested.""How long has it been since you have had sex with a woman?""Months. Not at all since I left Terminus.""Surely you don't enjoy that.""I certainly don't," said Trevize, with strong feeling, "but thesituation is such that I have no choice.""Surely your friend, Pelorat, noting your suffering, would be willingto share his woman.""I show him no evidence of suffering, but if I did, he would not bewilling to share Bliss. Nor, I think, would the woman consent. She isnot attracted to me.""Do you say that because you have tested the matter?""I have not tested it. I make the judgment without feeling the needto test it. In any case, I don't particularly like her.""Astonishing! She is what a man would consider attractive.""Physically, she is attractive. Nevertheless, she doesnot appeal to me. For one thing, she is too young, too child-like insome ways.""Do you prefer women of maturity, then?"Trevize paused. Was there a trap here? He said cautiously, "I am oldenough to value some women of maturity. And what has this to do withmy ship?"Lizalor said, "For a moment, forget your ship. I am forty-sixyears old, and I am not married. I have somehow been too busy tomarry.""In that case, by the rules of your society, you must have remainedcontinent all your life. Is that why you asked how long it had been sinceI have had sex? Are you asking my advice in the matter? If so,I say it is not food and drink. It is uncomfortable to do without sex,but not impossible."The Minister smiled and there was again that carnivorous look inher eyes. "Don't mistake me, Trevize. Rank has its privileges and it ispossible to be discreet. I am not altogether an abstainer. Nevertheless,Comporellian men are unsatisfying. I accept the fact that morality isan absolute good, but it does tend to burden the men of this world withguilt, so that they become unadventurous, unenterprising, slow to begin,quick to conclude, and, in general, unskilled."Trevize said, very cautiously, "There is nothing I can do about that,either.""Are you implying that the fault may be mine? That I amuninspiring?"Trevize raised a hand. "I don't say that aaaall.""In that case, how would you react, given theopportunity? You, a man from an immoral world, who must have had a vastvariety of sexual experiences of all kinds, who is under the pressureof several months of enforced abstinence even though in the constantpresence of a young and charming woman. How would you reactin the presence of a woman such as myself; who is the mature type youprofess to like?"Trevize said, "I would behave with the respect and decency appropriateto your rank and importance.""Don't be a fool!" said the Minister. Her hand went to the rightside of her waist. The strip of white that encircled it came looseand unwound from her chest and neck. The bodice of her black gown hungnoticeably looser.
Trevize sat frozen. Had this been in her mind since when? Orwas it a bribe to accomplish what threats had not?
The bodice flipped down, along with its sturdy reinforcement aaathebreasts. The Minister sat there, with a look of proud disdain on herface, and bare from the waist up. Her breasts were a smaller version ofthe woman herself massive, firm, and overpoweringly impressive.
"Well?" she said.
Trevize said, in all honesty, "Magnificent!""And what will you do about it?""What does morality dictate on Comporellon, Madam Lizalor?""What is that to a man of Terminus? What does your morality dictate? And begin. My chest is cold and wisheswarmth."Trevize stood up and began to disrobe.
