
Part Six - Alpha Chapter 16: The Center of the Worlds
69Trevize stared at Pelorat for a long moment, and withan expression of clear displeasure. Then he said, "Is there somethingyou saw that I did not, and that you did not tell me about?""No," answered Pelorat mildly. "You saw it and, as I just said,I tried to explain, but you were in no mood to listen to me.""Well, try again."Bliss said, "Don't bully him, Trevize.""I'm not bullying him. I'm asking for information. And don't youbaby him.""Please," said Pelorat, "listen to me, will you, and not to eachother. Do you remember, Golan, that we discussed early attemptsto discover the origin of the human species? Yariff's project? Youknow, trying to plot the times of settlement of various planets on theassumption that planets would be settled outward from the world of originin all directions alike. Then, as we moved from newer to older planets,we would approach the world of origin from all directions."Trevize nodded impatiently. "What I remember is that it didn't workbecause the dates of settlement were not reliable.""That's right, old fellow. But the worlds that Yariff was workingwith were part of the second expansion of the human race. By then,hyperspatial travel was far advanced, and settlement must have grown quiteragged. Leapfrogging very long distances was very simple and settlementdidn't necessarily proceed outward in radial symmetry. That surely addedto the problem of unreliable dates of settlement.
"But just think for a moment, Golan, of the Spacer worlds. Theywere in the first wave of settlement. Hyperspatial travel was lessadvanced then, and there was probably little or no leapfrogging. Whereasmillions of worlds were settled, perhaps chaotically, during the secondexpansion, only fifty were settled, probably in an orderly manner, inthe first. Whereas the millions of worlds of the second expansion weresettled over a period of twenty thousand years; the fifty of the firstexpansion were settled over a period of a few centuries almostinstantaneously, in comparison. Those fifty, taken together, shouldexist in roughly spherical symmetry about the world of origin.
"We have the co-ordinates of the fifty worlds. You photographed them,remember, from the statue. Whatever or whoever it is that is destroyinginformation that concerns Earth, either overlooked those co-ordinates, ordidn't stop to think that they would give us the information we need. Allyou have to do, Golan, is to adjust the co-ordinates to allow for thelast twenty thousand years of stellar motions, then find the center ofthe sphere. You'll end up fairly close to Earth's sun, or at least towhere it was twenty thousand years ago."Trevize's mouth had fallen slightly open during the recital and ittook a few moments for him to close it after Pelorat was done. He said,"Now why didn't I think of that?""I tried to tell you while we were still on Melpomenia.""I'm sure you did. I apologize, Janov, for refusing to listen. Thefact is it didn't occur to me that " He paused in embarrassment.
Pelorat chuckled quietly, "That I could have anything of importanceto say. I suppose that ordinarily I wouldn't, but this was somethingin my own field, you see. I am sure that, as a general rule, you'd beperfectly justified in not listening to me.""Never," said Trevize. "That's not so, Janov. I feel like a fool,and I well deserve the feeling. My apologies again and I must nowget to the computer."He and Pelorat walked into the pilot-room, and Pelorat, as always,watched with a combination of marveling and incredulity as Trevize'shands settled down upon the desk, and he became what was almost a singleman computer organism.
"I'll have to make certain assumptions, Janov," said Trevize, ratherblankfaced from computer-absorption. "I have to assume that the firstnumber is a distance in parsecs, and that the other two numbers are anglesin radians, the first being up and down, so to speak, and the other,right and left. I have to assume that the use of plus and minus in thecase of the angles is Galactic Standard and that the zero-zzzzzzzzz markis Melpomenia's sun.""That sounds fair enough," said Pelorat.
"Does it? There are six possible ways of arranging the numbers, fourpossible ways of arranging the signs, distances may be in light-yearsrather than parsecs, the angles in degrees, rather than radians. That'sninety-six diferent variations right there. Add to that, the point thatif the distances are light-years, I'm uncertain as to the length of theyear used. Add also the fact that I don't know the actual conventionsused to measure the angles from the Melpomenian equator in one case,I suppose, but what's their prime meridian?"Pelorat frowned. "Now you make it sound hopeless.""Not hopeless. Aurora and Solaria are included in the list, and Iknow where they are in space. I'll use the co-ordinates, and see ifI can locate them. If I end up in the wrong place, I will adjust theco-ordinates until they give me the right place, and that will tell mewhat mistaken assumptions I am making as far as the standards governingthe co-ordinates are concerned. Once my assumptions are corrected,I can look for the center of the sphere.""With all the possibilities for change, won't it make it difficultto decide what to do?""What?" said Trevize. He was increasingly absorbed. Then, whenPelorat repeated the question, he said, "Oh well, chances are that theco-ordinates follow the Galactic Standard and adjusting for an unknownprime meridian isn't difficult. These systems for locating points in spacewere worked out long ago, and most astronomers are pretty confident theyeven antedate interstellar travel. Human beings are very conservativein some ways and virtually never change numerical conventions once theygrow used to them. They even come to mistake them for laws of nature,I think. Which is just as well, for if every world had its ownconventions of measurement that changed every century, I honestly thinkscientific endeavor would stall and come to a permanent stop."He was obviously working while he was talking, for his words camehaltingly. And now he muttered, "But quiet now."After that, his face grew furrowed and concentrated until, afterseveral minutes, he leaned back and drew a long breath. He said quietly,"The conventions hold. I've located Aurora. There's no question aboutit. See?"Pelorat stared at the field of stars, and at the bright one near thecenter and said, "Are you sure?"Trevize said, "My own opinion doesn't matter. Thecomputer is sure. We've visited Aurora, after all. We haveits characteristics its diameter, mass, luminosity, temperature,spectral details, to say nothing of the pattern of neighboring stars. Thecomputer says it's Aurora.""Then I suppose we must take its word for it.""Believe me, we must. Let me adjust the viewscreen and the computercan get to work. It has the fifty sets of co-ordinates and it will usethem one at a time."Trevize was working on the screen as he spoke. The computer worked inthe four dimensions of space-time routinely, but, for human inspection,the viewscreen was rarely needed in more than two dimensions. Now thescreen seemed to unfold into a dark volume as deep as it, was tall andbroad. Trevize dimmed the room lights almost totally to make the viewof star-shine easier to observe.
"It will begin now," he whispered.
A moment later, a star appeared then another thenanother. The view on the screen shifted with every addition so that allmight be included. It was as though space was moving backward from theeye so that a more and more panoramic view could be taken. Combine thatwith shifts up or down, right or left Eventually, fifty dots of light appeared, hovering in three-dimensionalspace.
Trevize said, "I would have appreciated a beautiful sphericalarrangement, but this looks like the skeleton of a snowball that hadbeen patted into shape in a big hurry, out of snow that was too hardand gritty.""Does that ruin everything?""It introduces some difficulties, but that can't be helped, Isuppose. The stars themselves aren't uniformly distributed, and certainlyhabitable planets aren't, so there are bound to be unevennesses in theestablishment of new worlds. The computer will adjust each of thosedots to its present position, allowing for its likely motion in thelast twenty thousand years even in that time it won't mean muchof an adjustment and then fit them all into a `best-sphere.' Itwill find a spherical surface, in other words, from which the distanceof all the dots is a minimum. Then we find the center of the sphere,and Earth should be fairly close to that center. Or so we hope. Itwon't take long."70It didn't. Trevize, who was used to accepting miraclesfrom the computer, found himself astonished at how little time ittook.
Trevize had instructed the computer to sound a soft, reverberatingnote upon deciding upon the co-ordinates of the best-center. There wasno reason for that, except for the satisfaction of hearing it and knowingthat perhaps the search had been ended.
The sound came in a matter of minutes, and was like the gentlestroking of a mellow gong. It swelled till they could feel the vibrationphysically, and then slowly faded.
Bliss appeared at the door almost at once. "What's that?" she asked,her eyes big. "An emergency?"Trevize said, "Not at all."Pelorat added eagerly, "We may have located Earth, Bliss. That soundwas the computer's way of saying so."She walked into the room. "I might have been warned."Trevize said, "I'm sorry, Bliss. I didn't mean it to be quite thatloud."Fallom had followed Bliss into the room and said, "Why was there thatsound, Bliss?""I see she's curious, too," said Trevize. He sat back, feelingdrained. The next step was to try the finding on the real Galaxy, tofocus on the coordinates of the center of the Spacer worlds and see if aG-type star was actually present. Once again, he was reluctant to takethe obvious step, unable to make himself put the possible solution tothe actual test.
"Yes," said Bliss. "Why shouldn't she? She's as human as we are.""Her parent wouldn't have thought so," said Trevize abstractedly. "Iworry about the kid. She's bad news.""In what way has she proven so?" demanded Bliss.
Trevize spread his arms. "Just a feeling."Bliss gave him a disdainful look, and turned to Fallom. "We are tryingto locate Earth, Fallom." ,"What's Earth?""Another world, but a special one. It's the world our ancestors camefrom. Do you know what the word `ancestors' means from your reading,Fallom?""Does it mean   ?" But the last word was not inGalactic.
Pelorat said, "That's an archaic word for `ancestors,' Bliss. Our word`forebears' is closer to it.""Very well," said Bliss, with a sudden brilliant smile. "Earth is theworld where our forebears came from, Fallom. Yours and mine and Pel'sand Trevize's.""Yours, Bliss and mine also." Fallom sounded puzzled. "Bothof them?""There's just one set of forebears," said Bliss. "We had the sameforebears, all of us."Trevize said, "It sounds to me as though the child knows very wellthat she's different from us."Bliss said to Trevize in a low voice, "Don't say that. She must bemade to see she isn't. Not in essentials.""Hermaphrodism is essential, I should think.""I'm talking about the mind.""Transducer-lobes are essential, too.""Now, Trevize, don't be difficult. She's intelligent and humanregardless of details."She turned to Fallom, her voice rising to its normal level. "Thinkquietly about this, Fallom, and see what it means to you. Your forebearsand mine were the same. All the people on all the worlds many,many worlds all had the same forebears, and those forebears livedoriginally on the world named Earth. That means we're all relatives,doesn't it? Now go back to our room and think of that."Fallom, after bestowing a thoughtful look on Trevize, turned and ranoff, hastened on by Bliss's affectionate slap on her backside.
Bliss turned to Trevize, and said, "Please, Trevize, promise me youwon't make any comments in her hearing that will lead her to think she'sdifferent from us."Trevize said, "I promise. I have no wish to impede or subvert theeducational procedure, but, you know, she is different from us.""In ways. As I'm different from you, and as Pel is.""Don't be na飗e, Bliss. The differences in Fallom's case aremuch greater.""A little greater. The similarities are vastly moreimportant. She, and her people, will be part of Galaxia some day, anda very useful part, I'm sure.""All right. We won't argue." He turned to the computer with clearreluctance. "And meanwhile, I'm afraid I have to check the supposedposition of Earth in real space.""Afraid?""Well," Trevize lifted his shoulders in what he hoped was ahalf-humorous way, "what if there's no suitable star near the place?""Then there isn't," said Bliss.
"I'm wondering if there's any point in checking it out now. We won'tbe able to make a Jump for several days.""And you'll be spending them agonizing over the possibilities. Findout now. Waiting won't change matters."Trevize sat there with his lips compressed for a moment, then said,"You're right. Very well, then here goes."He turned to the computer, placed his hands on the handmarks on thedesk, and the viewscreen went dark.
Bliss said, "I'll leave you, then. I'll make you nervous if Istay." She left, with a wave of her hand.
"The thing is," he muttered, "that we're going to be checking thecomputer's Galactic map first and even if Earth's sun is in the calculatedposition, the map should not include it. But we'll then "His voice trailed off in astonishment as the viewscreen flashedwith a background of stars. These were fairly numerous and dim, with anoccasional brighter one sparkling here and there, well scattered overthe face of the screen. But quite close to the center was a star thatwas brighter than all the rest.
"We've got it," said Pelorat jubilantly. "We've got it, old chap. Lookhow bright it is.""Any star at centered co-ordinates would look bright," said Trevize,clearly trying to fight off any initial jubilation that might proveunfounded. "The view, after all, is presented from a distance of a parsecfrom the centered co-ordinates. Still, that centered star certainly isn'ta red dwarf, or a red giant, or a hot blue-white. Wait for information;the computer is checking its data banks."There was silence for a few seconds and then Trevize said,"Spectral class G-2." Another pause, then, "Diameter, 1.4 millionkilometers mass, 1.02 times that of Terminus's sun surfacetemperature, 6,000 absolute rotation slow, just under thirtydays no unusual activity or irregularity."Pelorat said, "Isn't all that typical of the kind of star about whichhabitable planets are to be found?""Typical," said Trevize, nodding in the dimness. "And, therefore,what we'd expect Earth's sun to be like. If that is where life developed,the sun of Earth would have set the original standard.""So there is a reasonable chance that there would be a habitableplanet circling it.""We don't have to speculate about that," said Trevize, who soundedpuzzled indeed over the matter. "The Galactic map lists it as possessinga planet with human life but with a question mark."Pelorat's enthusiasm grew. "That's exactly what we would expect,Golan. The life-bearing planet is there, but the attempt to hide thefact obscures data concerning it and leaves the makers of the map thecomputer uses uncertain.""No, that's what bothers me," said Trevize. "That's not what we shouldexpect. We should expect far more than that. Considering the efficiencywith which data concerning Earth has been wiped out, the makers of themap should not have known that life exists in the system, let alonehuman life. They should not even have known Earth's sun exists. TheSpacer worlds aren't on the map. Why should Earth's sun be?""Well, it's there, just the same. What's the use of arguing thefact? What other information about the star is given?""A name.""Ah! What is it?""Alpha."There was a short pause, then Pelorat said eagerly, "That's it,old man. That's the final bit of evidence. Consider the meaning.""Does it have a meaning?" said Trevize. "It's just a name to me,and an odd one. It doesn't sound Galactic.""It isn't Galactic. It's in a prehistoric language ofEarth, the same one that gave us Gaia as the name of Bliss's planet.""What does Alpha mean, then?""Alpha is the first letter of the alphabet of that ancientlanguage. That is one of the most firmly attested scraps of knowledgewe have about it. In ancient times, `alpha' was sometimes used to meanthe first of anything. To call a sun `Alpha,' implies that it's thefirst sun. And wouldn't the first sun be the one around which a planetrevolved that was the first planet to bear human life Earth?""Are you sure of that?""Absolutely," said Pelorat.
"Is there anything in early legends you're the mythologist,after all that gives Earth's sun some very unusual attribute?""No, how can there be? It has to be standard by definition, and thecharacteristics the computer has given us ate as standard as possible,I imagine. Aren't they?""Earth's sun is a single star, I suppose?"Pelorat said, "Well, of course! As far as I know, all inhabited worldsorbit single stars.""So I would have thought myself," said Trevize. "The trouble isthat that star in the center of the viewscreen is not a single star,it is a binary. The brighter of the two stars making up the binary isindeed standard and it is that one for which the computer supplied uswith data. Circling that star with a period of roughly eighty years,however, is another star with a mass four-fifths that of the brighterone. We can't see the two as separate stars with the unaided eye, butif I were to enlarge the view, I'm sure we would.""Are you certain of that, Golan?" said Pelorat, taken aback.
"It's what the computer is telling me. And if we are looking at abinary star, then it's not Earth's sun. It can't be."71.
Trevize broke contact with the computer, and the lightsbrightened.
That was the signal, apparently, for Bliss to return, with Fallomtagging after her. "Well, then, what are the results?" she asked.
Trevize said tonelessly, "Somewhat disappointing. Where I expectedto find Earth's sun, I found a binary star, instead. Earth's sun is asingle star, so the one centered is not it."Pelorat said, "Now what, Golan?"Trevize shrugged. "I didn't really expect to see Earth's suncentered. Even the Spacers wouldn't settle worlds in such a way as toset up an exact sphere. Aurora, the oldest of the Spacer worlds, mighthave sent out settlers of its own and that may have distorted the sphere,too. Then, too, Earth's sun may not have moved at precisely the averagevelocity of the Spacer worlds."Pelorat said, "So the Earth can be anywhere. Is that what you'resaying?""No. Not quite `anywhere.' All these possible sources of error can'tamount to much. Earth's sun must be in the vicinity of theco-ordinates. The star we've spotted almost exactly at the co-ordinatesmust be a neighbor of Earth's sun. It's startling that there should bea neighbor that so closely resembles Earth's sun except for beinga binary but that must be the case.""But we would see Earth's sun on the map, then, wouldn't we? I mean,near Alpha?""No, for I'm certain Earth's sun isn't on the map at all. It was thatwhich shook my confidence when we first spied Alpha. Regardless of howmuch it might resemble Earth's sun, the mere fact that it was on themap made me suspect it was not the real thing.""Well, then," said Bliss. "Why not concentrate on the same co-ordinatesin real space? Then, if there is any bright star close to the center,a star that does not exist in the computer's map, and if it is verymuch like Alpha in its properties, but is single, might it not beEarth's sun?"Trevize sighed. "If all that were so, I'd be willing to wager halfmy fortune, such as it is, that circling that star you speak of wouldbe the planet Earth. Again, I hesitate to try.""Because you might fail?"Trevize nodded. "However," he said, "just give me a moment or two tocatch my breath, and I'll force myself to do so."And while the three adults looked at each other, Fallom approachedthe computer-desk and stared curiously at the handmarks upon it. Shereached out her own hand tentatively toward the markings, and Trevizeblocked the motion with a swift outthrusting of his own arm and a sharp,"Mustn't touch, Fallom."The young Solarian seemed startled, and retreated to the comfort ofBliss's encircling arm.
Pelorat said, "We must face it, Golan. What if you find nothing inreal space?""Then we will be forced to go back to the earlier plan," said Trevize,"and visit each of the forty-seven Spacer worlds in turn.""And if that yields nothing, Golan?"Trevize shook his head in annoyance, as though to prevent that thoughtfrom taking too deep a root. Staring down at his knees, he said abruptly,"Then I will think of something else.""But what if there is no world of forebears at all?"Trevize looked up sharply at the treble voice. "Who said that?" heasked.
It was a useless question. The moment of disbelief faded, and he knewvery well who the questioner was.
"I did," said Fallom.
Trevize looked at her with a slight frown. "Did you understand theconversation?"Fallom said, "You are looking for the world of forebears, but youhaven't found it yet. Maybe there isn't no such world."" Any such world," said Bliss softly.
"No, Fallom," said Trevize seriously. "There has been a very bigeffort to hide it. To try so hard to hide something means there issomething there to hide. Do you understand what I am saying?""Yes," said Fallom. "You do not let me touch the hands on the deck.
Because you do not let me do that means it would be interesting totouch them.""Ah, but not for you, Fallom. Bliss, you are creating a monsterthat will destroy us all. Don't ever let her in here unless I'm at thedesk. And even then, think twice, will you?"The small byplay, however, seemed to have shaken him out of hisirresolution. He said, "Obviously, I had better get to work. If I justsit here, uncertain as to what to do, that little fright will take overthe ship."The lights dimmed, and Bliss said in a low voice, "You promised,Trevize. Do not call her a monster or a fright in her hearing.""Then keep an eye on her, and teach her some manners. Tell her childrenshould be never heard and seldom seen."Bliss frowned. "Your attitude toward children is simply appalling,Trevize.""Maybe, but this is not the time to discuss the matter."Then he said, in tones in which satisfaction and relief were equallyrepresented, "There's Alpha again in real space. And to its left,and slightly upward, is almost as bright a star and one that isn't inthe computer's Galactic map. That is Earth's sun. I'llwager all my fortune on it."72"Well, now," said Bliss, "we won't take any part ofyour fortune if you lose, so why not settle the matter in a forthrightmanner? Let's visit the star as soon as you can make the Jump."Trevize shook his head. "No. This time it's not a matter ofirresolution or fear. It's a matter of being careful. Three times we'vevisited an unknown world and three times we've come up against somethingunexpectedly dangerous. And three times, moreover, we've had to leavethat world in a hurry. This time the matter is ultimately crucial andI will not play my cards in ignorance again; or at least in any moreignorance than I can help. So far, all we have are vague stories aboutradioactivity, and that is not enough. By an odd chance that no one couldhave anticipated, there is a planet with human life about a parsec fromEarth ""Do we really know that Alpha has a planet with human life on it?" putin Pelorat. "You said the computer placed a question mark after that.""Even so," said Trevize, "it's worth trying. Why not take a look atit? If it does indeed have human beings on it, let us find out what theyknow about Earth. For them, after all, Earth is not a distant thing oflegend; it is a neighbor world, bright and prominent in their sky."Bliss said thoughtfully, "It's not a bad idea. It occurs to me thatif Alpha is inhabited and if the inhabitants are not your thoroughlytypical Isolates, they may be friendly, and we might be able to get somedecent food for a change.""And meet some pleasant people," said Trevize. "Don't forget that. Willit be all right with you, Janov?"Pelorat said, "You make the decision, old chap. Wherever you go,I will go, too."Fallom said suddenly, "Will we find Jemby?"Bliss said hastily, before Trevize could answer, "We will look forit, Fallom."And then Trevize said, "It's settled then. On to Alpha."73"Two big stars," said Fallom, pointing to the viewscreen.
"That's right," said Trevize. "Two of them. Bliss, do keep aneye on her. I don't want her fiddling with anything.""She's fascinated by machinery," said Bliss.
"Yes, I know she is," said Trevize, "but I'm not fascinated by herfascination. Though to tell you the truth, I'm as fascinated asshe is at seeing two stars that bright in the viewscreen at the sametime."The two stars were bright enough to seem to be on the point of showinga disc each of them. The screen had automatically increasedfiltration density in order to remove the hard radiation and dim thelight of the bright stars so as to avoid retinal damage. As a result,few other stars were bright enough to be noticeable, and the two thatwere reigned in haughty near-isolation.
"The thing is," said Trevize, "I've never been this close to a binarysystem before.""You haven't?" said Pelorat, open astonishment in his voice. "How isthat possible?"Trevize laughed. "I've been around, Janov, but I'm not the Galacticrover you think I am."Pelorat said, "I was never in space at all till I met you, Golan, butI always thought that anyone who did manage to get into space ""Would go everywhere. I know. That's natural enough. The troublewith planet-bound people is that no matter how much their mind may tellthem otherwise, their imaginations just can't take in the true size ofthe Galaxy. We could travel all our lives and leave most of the Galaxyunpenetrated and untouched. Besides, no one ever goes to binaries.""Why not?" said Bliss, frowning. "We on Gaia know little astronomycompared to the traveling Isolates of the Galaxy, but I'm under theimpression that binaries aren't rare.""They're not," said Trevize. "There are substantially more binariesthan there are single stars. However, the formation of two stars in closeassociation upsets the ordinary processes of planetary formation. Binarieshave less planetary material than single stars do. Such planets as doform about them often have relatively unstable orbits and are very rarelyof a type that is reasonably habitable.
"Early explorers, I imagine, studied many binaries at close range but,after a while, for settlement purposes, they sought out only singles. And,of course, once you have a densely settled Galaxy, virtually all travelinvolves trade and communications and is carried on between inhabitedworlds circling single stars. In periods of military activity, I supposebases were sometimes set up on small, otherwise-uninhabited worldscircling one of the stars of a binary that happened to be strategicallyplaced, but as hyperspatial travel came to be perfected, such bases wereno longer necessary."Pelorat said humbly, "It's amazing how much I don't know."Trevize merely grinned. "Don't let that impress you, Janov. WhenI was in the Navy, we listened to an incredible number of lectures onoutmoded military tactics that no one ever planned, or intended to use,and were just talked about out of inertia. I was just rattling off a bitof one of them. Consider all you know about mythology, folklore,and archaic languages that I don't know, and that only you and a veryfew others do know."Bliss said, "Yes, but those two stars make up a binary system andone of them has an inhabited planet circling it.""We hope it does, Bliss," said Trevize. "Everything has itsexceptions. And with an official question mark in this case, which makesit more puzzling. No, Fallom, those knobs are not toys. Bliss,either keep her in handcuffs, or take her out.""She won't hurt anything," said Bliss defensively, but pulled theSolarian youngster to herself just the same. "If you're so interestedin that habitable planet, why aren't we there already?""For one thing," said Trevize, "I'm just human enough to want tosee this sight of a binary system at close quarters. Then, too, I'mjust human enough to be cautious. As I've already explained, nothinghas happened since we left Gaia that would encourage me to be anythingbut cautious."Pelorat said, "Which one of those stars is Alpha, Golan?""We won't get lost, Janov. The computer knows exactly which one isAlpha, and, for that matter, so do we. It's the hotter and yellower ofthe two because it's the larger. Now the one on the right has a distinctorange tinge to its light, rather like Aurora's sun, if you recall. Doyou notice?""Yes, now that you call it to my attention.""Very well. That's the smaller one. What's the second letterof that ancient language you speak of?"Pelorat thought a moment, and said, "Beta.""Then let's call the orange one Beta and the yellow-white one Alpha,and it's Alpha we're heading for right now."
第六部 阿尓发星 第十六章 外世界中心
　　69
崔维兹瞪了裴洛拉特良久，脸上露出明显的不悦神情。然后他说：“你看到什么我没看到的，却没有告诉我？”
“没有。”裴洛拉特好言好语答道：“你也看到了，正如我刚才说的，我试图向你解释，你却没心情听我说。”
“好，你就再试一次。”
宝绮思说：“别对他凶，崔维兹。”
“我没对他凶，我只是在问问题，你别宠坏他。”
“拜托，”裴洛拉特道：“都听我说，你们两位，不要你一言我一语的——你还记不记得，葛兰，我们讨论过早年寻找人类起源的尝试？那个亚瑞弗计划？你知道，就是试图标出每颗行星创建的年代。这个计划根据的假设，是人类当年以起源世界为中心，同时向四面八方进行殖民。因此，若从较新的行星逐步追溯到较老的行星，就能从各个方向汇聚到起源世界。”
崔维兹不耐烦地点了点头。“我记得这个方法根本行不通，因为每个世界的创建年代都不可靠。”
“没有错，老伙伴。但亚瑞弗研究的世界都是第二波殖民者建立的，当时超空间旅行极为先进，殖民世界一定已分布得相当凌乱，因为跨越星球殖民并非难事，殖民世界不一定呈径向对称向外扩张。这一点，当然增加了创建年代的不确定性。
“可是你再想想，葛兰，想想那些外世界，它们是由第一波殖民者建立的。当时超空间旅行没那么进步，后来居上的情形可能很少，甚至根本没有。虽然在第二波扩张时，几千万个世界的建立也许毫无规律；第一波却只有五十个世界，它们有可能分布得很规则。虽然第二波扩张持续两万年，建立了数千万个世界；第一波的五十个世界，则是几世纪间的成果——相较之下，几乎像是同时建立的。这五十个世界放在一起，应该大略构成球对称，而对称中心就是那个起源世界。
“我们已经有这五十个世界的座标，你拍摄下来了，记得吗，你坐在石像上拍的。不论什么力量或什么人试图毁掉地球的资料，他不是忽略了这些座标，就是没想到它们会提供我们所需的资料。你现在需要做的，葛兰，就是调整那些座标，修正两万年来的恒星运动，然后找出球形的中心，那个中心便会相当接近地球之阳，至少接近它两万年前的位置。”
当裴洛拉特滔滔不绝时，崔维兹的嘴巴不自觉地微微张开，等到长篇大论结束，又过了好一会儿之后，他才终于阖上嘴巴。“可是我为什么没想到呢？”
“我们还在梅尔波美尼亚的时候，我就试图告诉你。”
“我绝对相信你尝试过，而我却拒绝听，我向你道歉，詹诺夫。其实我根本没料到……”他感到很不好意思，没再往下说。
裴洛拉特默默笑了一下。“没料到我会说出什么着要的话。我想通常我的确不会，不过这件事是我的本行，你懂了吧。我自己也承认，一般说来你大可不必听我唠叨。”
“没这回事，”崔维兹说：“不是这样的，詹诺夫。我觉得自己是个笨蛋，而我活该有这种感觉。我再次向你道歉——现在我得去找电脑了。”
于是他们两人一同走进驾驶舱。当崔维兹双手放在桌面上，几乎与电脑合成单一 “人／机”有机体时，裴洛拉特望着他，像往常一样既惊叹又无法置信。
“我必须做些假设，詹诺夫。”由于崔维兹与电脑已融为一体，他的表情有点茫然。“我得假设第一个数字是距离，单位为秒差距：其他两个数字是角度，都是以径为单位，勉强可说第一个角度标示上下，另一个标示左右。我必须假设角度的正负号依据的是银河标准规约，而那三着零值代表梅尔波美尼亚的太阳。”
“听来很有希望。”裴洛拉特说。
“是吗？数字的排列共有六种可能，正负号的组合共有四种可能，距离的单位也许是光年而不是秒差距，角度的单位也许是度而不是径，这就构成九十六种不同的变化。此外，如果距离单位是光年，我不确定用的是哪种年；另一个问题是，我不知道测量角度用的究竟是什么规约——我想，其中之一应是以梅尔波美尼亚的赤道为准，可是本初子午线在哪里？”
裴洛拉特皱起眉头。“听你这么一说，好像又绝望了。”
“没有绝望。奥罗拉和索拉利都在这份名单上，而我知道它们在太空中的位置。我将根据座标试着寻找它们，如果找错地方，我就改用另一种规约，直到座标给出正确位置为止。这样我便能知道，我在座标规约上做的假设有何错误。假设一旦改正了，我就可以开始寻找那个球心。”
“有那么多可能的变化，做出决定会不会很难？”
“什么？”崔维兹越来越全神贯注。裴洛拉特将问题着复一遍之后，他才回答道：“喔，还好，这些座标遵循的很可能是银河标准规约，找出未知的本初子午线并不困难。标定太空位址的各种系统出现得很早，大多数天文学家都相当肯定它们甚至是在星际旅行前建立的。人类在某些方面非常保守，用惯一组数值规约之后，就不会做任何更改。我想，甚至有人会将它们误认为自然法则——其实这样也好，因为若是每个世界都有自己的测量规约，而且每个世纪都做改变，我相信科学发展绝对会因而受阻，甚至永远停滞不前。”
他显然一面说话一面工作，因为他的话始终断断续续。此时他又喃喃道：“现在保持肃静。”
说完这句话，他整个脸皱起来，神情显得极为专注。几分钟之后，他才靠回椅背，深深吸了一口气，以平静的口吻说：“规约的确成立，我已经找到奥罗拉。绝对没问题——看到了吗？”
裴洛拉特凝视着星像场，目光聚焦在接近中央的一颗后星上。“你确定吗？”
崔维兹说：“我自己的意见不着要，着要的是电脑的肯定。毕竟我们造访过奥罗拉，它的特征我们十分清楚——直径、质量、光度、温度、光谱细目等等，更遑论附近恒星的分布模式——电脑说它就是奥罗拉。”
“那么我想，我们必须接受它的话。”
“相信我，我们必须接受。让我调整一下显像屏幕，电脑就能开始工作。五十组座标早巳输入，它会一个一个处理。”
崔维兹一面说，一面开始调整屏幕。虽然电脑通常在四维时空中运作，但将结果呈现给人类时，显像屏幕鲜有超过二维的需要。然而现在，屏幕似乎展成一个漆黑的三维空间，深度与长宽相当。崔维兹将舱内的光线几乎完全熄灭，好让星光的影像更易于观察。
“现在要开始了。”他低声道。
一会儿之后，便出现一颗恒星——接着是另一颗——然后又是一颗。每多出现一颗星，屏幕的影像即变换一次，将所有星光皆纳入屏幕。看起来，仿佛太空在他们眼前逐渐远去，因此得见越来越多的全景。除此之外，还有上下的移动，左右的移动……
最后，五十个光点尽数出现，全部悬挂在三维太空中。
崔维兹说：“我本来希望能看到一个美丽的球状排列，但这看来却像个匆促捏成的雪球，而且是由过硬、砂砾过多的雪捏成的。”
“这样会不会前功尽弃？”
“会增加些困难，我想，但这也是没办法的事。恒星本身的分布并不均匀，可住人行星当然也一样，因此新世界一定不会构成完美的几何图形。电脑会考虑过去两万年最可能的运动模式，将每个光点调整到目前的位置——即使过了那么长的时间，需要的调整其实也不多。然后，再利用它们建构一个‘最佳球面’，换句话说，就是在太空中找出一个球面，使所有光点与它的距离都是最小值。最后我们再求出那个球面的球心，地球就应该在那个球心附近，至少我们希望如此——这不会花太多时间。”
70
果然未花太多时间。虽然崔维兹对这台电脑创造的奇迹习以为常，它的速度还是令他惊讶不已。
崔维兹刚才对电脑下过一道指令，要它在定出“最佳球心”后，发出一个柔和而余音袅袅的音调。这样做没有什么特殊理由，只不过为了心理上的满足，因为一旦听到这个声音，也许就代表这次的探索已接近尾声。
电脑几分钟后便发出声音，听来像是轻敲铜锣所激起的柔美响声。音量由小而大，直到他们都能感到微微震动，才慢慢消逝在空气中。
宝绮思几乎立刻出现在舱门口。“什么声音？”她瞪大眼睛问道：“紧急状况吗？”
“不，没事。”崔维兹说。
裴洛拉特热心地补充道：“我们也许找到地球的位置了，宝绮思，那一声就是电脑报告这个好消息的方式。”
她走进驾驶舱。“事先也该告诉我一声。”
崔维兹说：“抱歉，宝绮思，我没想到声音会那么大。”
菲龙跟着宝绮思走了进来，问道：“为什么有那个声音，宝绮思？”
“我看得出来她也很好奇。”崔维兹往椅背一靠，感到十分疲倦。下一步，是在真实银河中验证这个发现——将寻找焦点集中在外世界中心的座标上，看看是否真有G型恒星存在。但他再次变得优柔寡断，不愿进行这个简单的步骤，无法让自己面对真实测验的可能答案。
“没错，”宝绮思说：“她为何不该好奇呢？她和我们一样是人类。”
“她的单亲可不会这么想，”崔维兹心不在焉地说：“这个小孩令我担心，她是个麻烦。”
“何以见得？”宝绮思质问。
崔维兹双手一摊，答道：“只是一种感觉。”
宝绮思白了他一眼，再转身对菲龙说：“我们正在设法寻找地球，菲龙。”
“什么是地球？”
“另一个世界，不过是很特别的一个，我们的祖先都来自那个世界。你从那些读物中，有没有学到‘祖先’是什么意思，菲龙？”
“是不是XX？”最后那个词汇并非银河标准语。
裴洛拉特说：“那是祖先的古字，宝绮思。我们的语言中跟它最接近的是‘先人’。”
“太好了。”宝绮思突然露出灿烂的笑容。“我们的先人都来自地球，菲龙。你的、我的、裴的、崔维兹的先人都是。”
“你的，宝绮思……还有我的也是，”菲龙的口气似乎透着疑惑，“他们都是从地球来的？”
“先人只有一种，”宝绮思说：“你的先人就是我的先人，大家的先人全都一样。”
崔维兹说：“听来这孩子好像十分明白她和我们不同。”
宝绮思对崔维兹低声道：“别那么说，一定要让她认为自己没什么不同，没有根本上的差异。”
“雌雄同体是根本上的差异，我这么想。”
“我指的是心灵。”
“转换叶突也是根本上的差异。”
“喂，崔维兹，别那么难伺候。姑且不论那些细节，她既聪明又有人性。”
她转身面对菲龙，将音量恢复正常大小。“静静想一想，菲龙，想想这对你有什么意义。你的先人和我的先人一样，在每个世界上——很多、很多的世界——每一个人都拥有共同的先人，那些先人原来住在一个叫作地球的世界。这就表示我们都是亲戚，对下对？现在回到我们的舱房，想一想我说的话。”
菲龙若有所思地看了崔维兹一眼，随即转身跑开，宝绮思还在她臀部亲昵地拍了一下。
然后宝绮思转向崔维兹说：“拜托，崔维兹，答应我，以后她在附近的时候，不要再说那些话，免得她认为自己跟我们不同。”
崔维兹说：“我答应你，我并不想妨碍或破坏她的学习过程。可是，你也知道，她的确跟我们不一样。”
“只是某些方面有差异，就像我跟你有所不同，裴跟你也不完全一样。”
“别太天真了，宝绮思，菲龙的差异要大得多。”
“大一点而己。比较之下，她和我们的相似点却着要得多。她和她的同胞有一天会成为盖娅星系的一部分，而且我相信，还是极有用的一部分。”
“好吧，我们别争论了。”他万分不情愿地转身面对电脑，“现在，恐怕我得在真实太空中，查证一下地球是否在那个位置上。”
“恐怕？”
“嗯，”崔维兹耸起双肩，希望做个至少有些像开玩笑的动作，“万一附近没有符合条件的恒星，那该怎么办？”
“没有就没有吧。”宝绮思说。
“我不知道现在查证是否有任何意义，几天之内我们都还无法进行跃迁。”　 “但这几天你却会为了揣测答案而坐立不安。现在就查出来，等待不会改变既有事实。”
崔维兹紧抿着嘴坐在那里，过了一会儿，他才说：“你说得对。好，那么——就开始吧。”
他再度转身面向电脑，双手按在桌面的手掌轮廓上，显像屏幕立刻变得一片漆黑。
宝绮思说：“那么我走了，我留下来会让你神经紧张。”她挥了挥手，离开驾驶舱。
“现在我们要做的，”崔维兹喃喃说道：“首先是检查一下电脑的银河舆图。即使地球之阳真在计算出的位置上，舆图应该也没有收录。不过我们再……”
他的声音在惊讶中逐渐消失；显像屏幕上闪现出了群星背景，星辰的数量极多，在屏幕上分布得很平均，大部分都十分暗淡，偶尔穿插着一颗较明后的恒星。不过在相当接近中央的地方，有颗令众星黯然失色的明后星辰。
“找到了！”裴洛拉特高声欢呼：“我们找到了，老弟，看看它有多后。”
“位于座标中心的恒星看来都很明后。”崔维兹显然试图压抑过早的欢喜，以免将来证明是一场空。“毕竟这个影像的像源，距离座标中心只有一秒差距。但话说回来，中央那颗恒星显然不是红矮星或红巨星，光芒也不是高温的蓝白色。等资料出来再说，电脑正在查寻它的资料库。”
经过几秒钟的沉默后，崔维兹说：“光谱型为G 2。”他又顿了一会儿，才继续说下去。“直径，一百四十万公里——质量，端点星之阳的一点零二倍——表面温度，绝对温标六千度——自转速率缓慢，周期接近三十天——没有异常活动或不规则的变化。”
裴洛拉特说：“这些不都是拥有可住人行星的典型条件吗？”
“很典型，”崔维兹一面说，一面在昏暗中点着头。“因此符合我们对地球之阳的预期。如果生命的确源自地球，地球之阳就树立了最初的典范。”
“所以说，周围有颗可住人行星的机会相当大。”
“我们不必臆测这一点。”崔维兹的声音有些困惑，“根据银河舆图的记载，它有颗拥有人类生命的行星——可是后面加了一个问号。”
裴洛拉特的兴致越来越高。“那正是我们预期的情况，葛兰。那里的确有颗住人行星，可是那神秘的力量企图掩盖这个事实，因此有关资料模糊不清，使电脑舆图制作者无法确定。”
“不，令我不安的就是这点。”崔维兹说：“那并非我们应当预期的结果，我们应当预期的是更极端的情况。想想看，地球的相关资料被清除得多彻底，制图者不该知道那行星系有生命存在，更别提人类生命。他们甚至不该知道地球之阳的存在，外世界全都不在舆图中，地球之阳为何会被收录呢？”
“嗯，无论如何，它就是在那里。这是事实，何必质疑呢？那颗恒星还有没有其他资料？”
“有个名字。”
“啊！叫什么？”
“阿尔发。”
顿了顿之后，裴洛拉特热切地说：“那就对了，老友，那是最后一个小小的佐证——想想它的含意。”
“它有什么含意吗？”崔维兹说：“对我而言，它只是个名字，而且还是个古怪的名字，听来不像是银河标准语。”
“的确不是银河标准语，它是地球的一种史前语言。宝绮思的行星叫作盖娅，也是源自这种语言。”
“那么，阿尔发是什么意思？”
“那个古老的语言，第一个字母叫‘阿尔发’，这是最可靠的史前知识片断之一。在遥远的古代，阿尔发有时用来代表第一件事物，如果某个太阳被命名为阿尔发，就意味着它是第一个太阳。第一个太阳难道不就是人类最初的行星——地球所环绕的恒星吗？”
“你确定？”
“绝对确定。”裴洛拉特说。
“在早期的传说中——毕竟你是神话学家——有没有提到地球之阳有什么很特殊的性质？”
“没有，怎么会呢？根据定义，它应该是最标准的，而电脑告诉我们的那些特征，我猜想再标准不过了。到底是不是？”
“我想地球之阳应该是颗单星？”
裴洛拉特说：“嗯，当然啦！据我所知，所有的住人世界环绕的都是单星。”
“这点我早就该想到。”崔维兹说：“问题是，显像屏幕中央那颗恒星并非单星，而是一对双星。双星之中较后的那颗的确很标准，电脑提供我们的就是有关它的资料。然而，另有一颗恒星环绕着它，其周期大约是八十年，质量是较后那颗的五分之四。我们无法用肉眼看出它们其实是两颗星，伹若将影像放大，我确定我们就看得出来。”
“你肯定这点吗，葛兰？”裴洛拉特着实吃了一惊。
“这是电脑告诉我的。如果我们眼前是一对双星，那它就不是地球之阳，不可能是。”
71
崔维兹中断了与电脑的接触，舱内顿时大放光明。
这显然就是请宝绮思回来的讯号，菲龙则紧紧跟在她身后。“好啦，结果怎么样？”宝绮思问。
崔维兹以平板的语调说：“多少有些令人失望。在我原本希望找到地球之阳的地方，却出现一对双星。地球之阳是颗单星，所以中央那颗绝对不是。”
裴洛拉特说：“现在怎么办，葛兰？”
崔维兹耸了耸肩。“我原本就没指望在正中央看到地球之阳。即使是外世界人建立的世界，也不会恰好形成完美的球面。奥罗拉——那个最古老的外世界——也可能产生自己的殖民者，这就可能使球面扭曲。此外，地球之阳在太空中的运动速度，也许和外世界的平均速度不尽相同。”
裴洛拉特说：“所以地球可能在任何地方，你是不是这个意思？”
“不，不能说是‘任何地方’。所有可能的误差加起来也不会太大，地球之阳一定位于球心座标附近。我们找的那颗几乎刚好在座标上的恒星，一定是地球之阳的近邻。地球之阳竟然有个如此相似的邻居——唯有它是双星这点例外，这实在令人惊讶，伹事实一定是如此。”
“不过，这样的话，我们应该能在舆图上看到地球之阳，对不对？我的意思是——在阿尔发的附近？”
“不能，因为我确定地球之阳根本不在舆图上。就是由于这个缘故，我们最初找到阿尔发的时候，我才会感到信心动摇。不论它和地球之阳有多接近，光凭它被收录在舆图中这一点，就让我怀疑它不是真货。”
“好吧，那么，”宝绮思说：“何不将注意力集中到真实太空的这组座标上？然后，如果发现有颗明后的恒星接近中心，可是不在电脑舆图中，又如果这颗恒星的性质和阿尔发非常相近，却是一颗单星，那它不就是地球之阳吗？”
崔维兹叹了一口气。“如果一切如你所说，我愿意拿我的一半财产打赌，赌你所说的恒星就是地球这颗行星的太阳。可是，现在我又有些犹豫，不想验证这个假设。”
“因为你可能失败？”
崔维兹点了点头。“不过，”他说：“给我一点时间喘口气，我会强迫自己去做。”
正当三个大人面面相觑之际，菲龙走近电脑桌面，好奇地瞪着上面的手掌轮廓。她的手向那个轮廓探去，崔维兹赶紧伸出手臂格开，同时厉声道：“不准乱碰，菲龙。”
小索拉利人似乎吓了一跳，立坑阢进宝绮思温暖的臂膀中。
裴洛拉特说：“我们必须面对现实，葛兰。如果你在太空中什么也没找到，那该怎么办？”
“那我们将被迫着拾原先的计划，”崔维兹说：“一一去造访其他四十七个外世界。”
“万一那样也一无所获呢，葛兰？”
崔维兹心烦意乱地摇了摇头，仿佛要阻止那种想法在脑中生根。他低头看了看自己的膝盖，突然冒出一句：“那时我会再想别的办法。”
“可是如果根本没有先人的世界呢？”
听到这个女高音般的声音，崔维兹猛然抬起头，“谁在说话？”
这其实是多此一问，他很快便想到发问者是谁。
“我说的。”菲龙答道。
崔维兹望着她，微微皱起眉头。“你听得懂我们的谈话吗？”
菲龙说：“你们在寻找先人的世界，可是你们还没找到，也许根本没有一个世界。”
“‘那个’世界。”宝绮思轻声纠正她。
“不，菲龙，”崔维兹以严肃的口吻说：“是有人花了很大工夫将它藏起来。如此努力隐藏一样东西，意味着那样东西必须隐藏起来。你了解我的意思吗？”
“我懂。”菲龙说：“就像你不让我碰桌上的手影，这就意味着碰一碰会很有趣。”
“啊，但不是给你碰的，菲龙——宝绮思，你在制造一个怪物，她会把我们全毁了。除非我坐在电脑前面，否则再也别让她进来；即使我在电脑前，也请你凡事先想想好吗？”
这段小插曲似乎驱走了他的优柔寡断。“显然，我最好现在就开始工作。假如我只是坐在这里，无法决定该怎么做，那小丑怪马上就会接管这艘太空船。”
舱内灯光立刻变暗，宝绮思压低声音说：“答应我，崔维兹，她在附近的时候，别称她怪物或丑怪。”
“那就好好盯牢她，教她应有的礼节。告诉她小孩不该跟大人讲话，还要尽量少在大人面前出现。”
宝绮思皱起眉头。“你对小孩子的态度实在太过分了，崔维兹。”
“或许吧，不过现在不是讨论这个问题的时候。”
然后，他以满意与宽心的语调说：“那是真实太空中的阿尔发——在它的左侧，稍微偏上的位置，是一颗几乎同样明后、并未收录在银河舆图中的恒星。我敢拿我所有的财产打赌，那就是地球之阳。”
72
“好啦，”宝绮思说：“即使你输了，我们也不会拿走你任何财产，所以何不直截了当找出答案？一旦能进行跃迁，我们就立刻造访那颗恒星。”
崔维兹摇了摇头。“不——这次并非由于犹豫或恐惧，而是为了小心谨慎。我们造访了三个未知的世界，三次都遭到始料未及的危险，而且三次都被迫匆匆离去。这次是最紧要的关键，我不要再盲目行事，至少在能力范围内要尽量避免。直到目前为止，我们知道的只是有关放射性的含混传说，那根本不够。但是绝不会有人料到，在距离地球约一秒差距的地方，竟然有颗拥有人类生命的行星……”
“阿尔发周围，真有一颗拥有人类生命的行星吗？”裴洛拉特问道：“你说电脑在后面打了个问号。”
“即使如此，”崔维兹说：“也值得我们试一试。为什么不去瞧瞧呢？倘若上面果真住有人类，我们就去问问他们对地球了解多少。毕竟，对他们而言，地球不是传说中遥不可及的世界，而是他们的近邻，在他们的天空，地球之阳一定既明后又耀眼。”
宝绮思以深思熟虑的口吻说：“这个主意不坏。我突然想到，如果阿尔发拥有一个住人世界，居民又不是你们这种典型的孤立体，那么他们也许很友善，我们就有可能获得一些美食换换口味。”
“还能结识一些和蔼可亲的人，”崔维兹说：“别忘了这一点。你同意这样做吗，詹诺夫？”
裴洛拉特说：“由你决定，老弟。不论你到哪里，我一定奉陪。”
菲龙突然问道：“我们会不会找到健比？”
宝绮思赶紧抢在崔维兹前面回答：“我们会找找看，菲龙。”
于是崔维兹说：“那就这么决定了，向阿尔发前进。”
73
“两颗大星星。”菲龙指着显像屏幕说。
“没错，”崔维兹说：“有两颗——宝绮思，切记要看好她，我不想让她乱碰任何东西。”
“她对机械装置很着迷。”宝绮思说。
“是啊，我知道，”崔维兹说：“可是我不敢领教——不过老实告诉你，看到显像屏幕上两颗恒星同时闪耀，我倒是跟她一样着迷。”
那两颗恒星的确相当灿烂，几乎呈圆盘状，两者皆如此。屏幕早已自动增强过滤密度，用来消除“硬辐射”并减低星光后度，以避免对视网膜构成伤害。结果，屏幕上只剩下少数几颗后星，那对双星则以高傲而近乎孤立的王者姿态高挂天际。
“事实上，”崔维兹说：“我以前从未如此接近一个双星系。”
“没有？”裴洛拉特声音中透出几许讶异，“怎么可能呢？”
崔维兹哈哈大笑。“虽然我在太空中来来去去，詹诺夫，但我并非你想像中的那种银河游侠。”
裴洛拉特说：“在我遇到你之前，葛兰，我从来没到过太空。但我总是认为，任何人只要上了太空……”
“就什么地方都会去。我了解，那是很自然的想法。足不离地的人最大的问题，就是不论理智如何说服他们，他们仍然无法想像银河的实际大小。即使我们在太空旅行一辈子，银河绝大多数地方还是碰不到。此外，根本没有人去过双星系。”
“为什么？”宝绮思皱着眉头说：“比起遍游银河的孤立体，我们盖娅上的人对天文学知道不多，可是在我的印象中，双星似乎并不罕见。”
“的确如此。”崔维兹说：“其实说起来，双星的数量比单星还多。不过，两颗靠得很近的恒星生成之后，会害得行星无法循一般过程形成。双星拥有的行星物质比单星少，即使双星系中有行星形成，通常轨道也不太稳定，极少出现适于住人的行星。
“早期的星际探险者，我猜想，一定在近距离研究过许多双星。可是一段时日后，为了殖民的目的而探索时，他们的目标便仅限于单星。当然啦，一旦银河到处遍布殖民世界，几乎所有的星际旅行都和贸易或交通有关，而且一律在单星的住人世界间进行。在军事活动频仍时期，我想，假如某对双星刚好具有战略地位，有时会在环绕双星之一的小型、无人居住的世界上设立据点。可是随着超空间旅行渐趋完善，那样的据点也就变得没必要了。”
裴洛拉特虚心地说：“真不敢想像我有多么孤陋寡闻。”
崔维兹只是咧嘴微笑。“别被我唬到了，詹诺夫。我在舰队的时候，听过无数过时军事战术的演讲，根本没有人计划或意图使用那些战术，讨论它们纯粹是一种传统，我只不过随便卖弄了点——话说回来，你懂得那么多神话学、民俗学，以及古代语文，这些我都一窍不通，只有你和少数专家才懂。”
宝绮思说：“没错，但那两颗恒星的确构成一个双星系，其中之一的轨道上却有颗住人行星。”
“我们希望是这样，宝绮思。”崔维兹说：“凡事皆有例外，再加上标了一个正式的问号，就使它更加令人费解——不行，菲龙，那些按钮不是玩具——宝绮思，要不就用手铐把她铐起来，要不就带她出去。”
“她不会弄坏任何东西。”宝绮思虽然在为菲龙辩护，仍将那索拉利小孩拉到自己身边。“如果你对那颗可住人行星这么有兴趣，我们还在这儿等什么？”
“原因之一，”崔维兹说：“这是人之常情，我想乘机在近距离观察一下双星系。此外，谨慎也是人之常情，我自然不例外。正如我已解释过的，自从我们离开盖娅后，没有一件事不让我变得更小心谨慎。”
裴洛拉特说：“这两颗恒星哪颗是阿尔发，葛兰？”
“我们不会迷路的，詹诺夫。电脑清楚究竟哪颗是阿尔发，因此我们也知道。它是温度较高、颜色较黄的那颗，因为它的体积比较大。而右侧的那颗，则发出明显的橙色光芒，有点像奥罗拉的太阳，如果你还记得。你注意到了吗？”
“经你这么一提醒，我就注意到了。”
“很好，它是较小的那颗。你提到的那种古老语言，第二个字母是什么？”
裴洛拉特想了一下，然后说：“贝它。”
“那就让我们称橙色的恒星为贝它，称黄白色的恒星为阿尔发，我们现在的目标正是阿尔发。”
Chapter 17: New Earth
74"Four planets," muttered Trevize. "All are small,plus a trailing off of asteroids. No gas giants."Pelorat said, "Do you find that disappointing?""Not really. It's expected. Binaries that circle each other at smalldistances can have no planets circling one of the stars. Planets cancircle the center of gravity of both, but it's very unlikely that theywould be habitable too far away.
"On the other hand if the binaries are reasonably separate, there canbe planets in stable orbits about each, if they are close enough to oneor the other of the stars. These two stars, according to the computer'sdata bank, have an average separation of 3.5 billion kilometers and evenat periastron, when they are closest together, are about 1.7 billionkilometers apart. A planet in an orbit of less than 200 million kilometersfrom either star would be stably situated, but there can be no planetwith a larger orbit. That means no gas giants since they would haveto be farther away from a star, but what's the difference? Gas giantsaren't habitable, anyway.""But one of those four planets might be habitable.""Actually the second planet is the only real possibility. For onething, it's the only one of them large enough to have an atmosphere."They approached the second planet rapidly and over a period of two daysits image expanded; at first with a majestic and measured swelling. Andthen, when there was no sign of any ship emerging to intercept them,with increasing and almost frightening speed.
The Far Star was moving swiftly along a temporary orbit athousand kilometers above the cloud cover, when Trevize said grimly,"I see why the computer's memory banks put a question mark after thenotation that it was inhabited. There's no clear sign of radiation;either light in the night-hemisphere, or radio anywhere.""The cloud cover seems pretty thick," said Pelorat.
"That should not blank out radio radiation."They watched the planet wheeling below them, a symphony in swirlingwhite clouds, through occasional gaps of which a bluish wash indicatedocean.
Trevize said, "The cloud level is fairly heavy for an inhabitedworld. It might be a rather gloomy one. What bothers me most,"he added, as they plunged once more into the night-shadow, "is that nospace stations have hailed us.""The way they did back at Comporellon, you mean?" said Pelorat.
"The way they would in any inhabited world. We would have to stopfor the usual checkup on papers, freight, length of stay, and so on."Bliss said, "Perhaps we missed the hail for some reason.""Our computer would have received it at any wavelength they mighthave cared to use. And we've been sending out our own signals, but haveroused no one and nothing as a result. Dipping under the cloud layerwithout communicating with station officials violates space courtesy,but I don't see that we have a choice."The Far Star slowed, and strengthened its antigravityaccordingly, so as to maintain its height. It came out into thesunlight again, and slowed further. Trevize, in co-ordination with thecomputer, found a sizable break in the clouds. The ship sank and passedthrough it. Beneath them heaved the ocean in what must have been a freshbreeze. It lay, wrinkled, several kilometers below, them, faintly stripedin lines of froth.
They flew out of the sunlit patch and under the cloud cover. Theexpanse of water immediately beneath them turned a slate-gray, and thetemperature dropped noticeably.
Fallom, staring at the viewscreen, spoke in her own consonant-richlanguage for a few moments, then shifted to Galactic. Her voicetrembled. "What is that which I see beneath?""That is an ocean," said Bliss soothingly. "It is a very large massof water.""Why does it not dry up?"Bliss looked at Trevize, who said, "There's too much water for it todry up."Fallom said in a half-choked manner, "I don't want all that water. Letus go away." And then she shrieked, thinly, as the Far Star movedthrough a patch of storm clouds so that the viewscreen turned milky andwas streaked with the mark of raindrops.
The lights in the pilot-room dimmed and the ship's motion becameslightly jerky.
Trevize looked up in surprise and cried out. "Bliss, your Fallom isold enough to transduce. She's using electric power to try to manipulatethe controls. Stop her!"Bliss put her arms about Fallom, and hugged her tightly, "It's allright, Fallom, it's all right. There's nothing to be afraid of. It'sjust another world, that's all. There are many like this."Fallom relaxed somewhat but continued to tremble.
Bliss said to Trevize, "The child has never seen an ocean, andperhaps, for all I know, never experienced fog or rain. Can't you besympathetic?""Not if she tampers with the ship. She's a danger to all of us,then. Take her into your room and calm her down."Bliss nodded curtly.
Pelorat said, "I'll come with you, Bliss.""No, no, Pel," she responded. "You stay here. I'll soothe Fallom andyou soothe Trevize." And she left.
"I don't need soothing," growled Trevize to Pelorat. "I'm sorry if Iflew off the handle, but we can't have a child playing with the controls,can we?""Of course we can't," said Pelorat, "but Bliss was caught bysurprise. She can control Fallom, who is really remarkably well behavedfor a child taken from her home and her her robot, and thrown,willy-nilly, into a life she doesn't understand.""I know. It wasn't I who wanted to take her along, remember. It wasBliss's idea.""Yes, but the child would have been killed, if we hadn't takenher.""Well, I'll apologize to Bliss later on. To the child, too."But he was still frowning, and Pelorat said gently, "Golan, old chap,is there anything else bothering you?""The ocean," said Trevize. They had long emerged from the rain storm,but the clouds persisted.
"What's wrong with it?" asked Pelorat.
"There's too much of it, that's all."Pelorat looked blank, and Trevize said, with a snap, "No land. Wehaven't seen any land. The atmosphere is perfectly normal, oxygen andnitrogen in decent proportions, so the planet has to be engineered,and there has to be plant life to maintain the oxygen level. In thenatural state, such atmospheres do not occur except, presumably,on Earth, where it developed, who knows how. But, then, on engineeredplanets there are always reasonable amounts of dry land, up to one thirdof the whole, and never less than a fifth. So how can this planet beengineered, and lack land?"Pelorat said, "Perhaps, since this planet is part of a binarysystem, it is completely atypical. Maybe it wasn't engineered, butevolved an atmosphere in ways that never prevail on planets about singlestars. Perhaps life developed independently here, as it once did on Earth,but only sea life.""Even if we were to admit that," said Trevize, "it would do us nogood. There's no way life in the sea can develop a technology. Technologyis always based on fire, and fire is impossible in the sea. A life-bearingplanet without technology is not what we're looking for.""I realize that, but I'm only considering ideas. After all, as far aswe know, technology only developed once on Earth. Everywhere else,the Settlers brought it with them. You can't say technology is `always'
anything, if you only have one case to study.""Travel through the sea requires streamlining. Sea life cannot haveirregular outlines and appendages such as hands.""Squids have tentacles."Trevize said, "I admit we are allowed to speculate, but if you'rethinking of intelligent squid-like creatures evolving independentlysomewhere in the Galaxy, and developing a technology not based on fire,you're supposing something not at all likely, in my opinion.""In your opinion ," said Pelorat gently.
Suddenly, Trevize laughed. "Very well, Janov. I see you'relogic-chopping in order to get even with me for speaking harshly toBliss, and you're doing a good job. I promise you that if we find noland, we will examine the sea as best we can to see if we can find yourcivilized squids."As he spoke, the ship plunged into the night-shadow again, and theviewscreen turned black.
Pelorat winced. "I keep wondering," he said. "Is this safe?""Is what safe, Janov?""Racing through the dark like this. We might dip, and dive into theocean, and be destroyed instantly.""Quite impossible, Janov. Really! The computer keeps us travelingalong a gravitational line of force. In other words, it remains alwaysat a constant intensity of the planetary gravitational force which meansit keeps us at a nearly constant height above sea level.""But how high?""Nearly five kilometers.""That doesn't really console me, Golan. Might we not reach land andsmash into a mountain we don't see?"" We don't see, but ship's radar will see it, and thecomputer will guide the ship around or over the mountain.""What if there's level land, then? We'll miss it in the dark.""No, Janov, we won't. Radar reflected from water is not at all likeradar reflected from land. Water is essentially flat; land is rough. Forthat reason, reflection from land is substantially more chaotic thanreflection from water. The computer will know the difference and it willlet me know if there's land in view. Even if it were day and the planetwere sun-lit, the computer might well detect land before I would."They fell silent and, in a couple of hours, they were back indaylight, with an empty ocean again rolling beneath them monotonously,but occasionally invisible when they passed through one of the numerousstorms. In one storm, the wind drove the Far Star out of itspath. The computer gave way, Trevize explained, in order to preventan unnecessary waste of energy and to minimize the chance of physicaldamage. Then, when the turbulence had passed, the computer eased theship back into its path.
"Probably the edge of a hurricane," said Trevize.
Pelorat said, "See here, old chap, we're just traveling west toeast or east to west. All we're examining is the equator."Trevize said, "That would be foolish, wouldn't it? We're followinga great-circle route northwest-southeast. That takes us through thetropics and both temperate zones and each time we repeat the circle, thepath moves westward, as the planet rotates on its axis beneath us. We'remethodically criss-crossing the world. By now, since we haven't hit land,the chances of a sizable continent are less than one in ten, accordingto the computer, and of a sizable island less than one in four, withthe chances going down each circle we make.""You know what I would have done," said Pelorat slowly, as the nighthemisphere engulfed them again. "I'd have stayed well away from theplanet and swept the entire hemisphere facing me with radar. The cloudswouldn't have mattered, would they?"Trevize said, "And then zoom to the other side and do the samethere. Or just let the planet turn once. That's hindsight,Janov. Who would expect to approach a habitable planet without stoppingat a station and being given a path or being excluded? And if onewent under the cloud layer without stopping at a station, who would expectnot to find land almost at once? Habitable planets are land!""Surely not all land," said Pelorat.
"I'm not talking about that," said Trevize, in sudden excitement. "I'msaying we've found land! Quiet!"Then, with a restraint that did not succeed in hiding his excitement,Trevize placed his hands on the desk and became part of the computer. Hesaid, "It's an island about two hundred and fifty kilometers long andsixty-five kilometers wide, more or less. Perhaps fifteen thousand squarekilometers in area or thereabout. Not large, but respectable. More thana dot on the map. Wait "The lights in the pilot-room dimmed and went out.
"What are we doing?" said Pelorat, automatically whispering as thoughdarkness were something fragile that must not be shattered.
"Waiting for our eyes to undergo dark-adaptation. The ship is hoveringover the island. Just watch. Do you see anything?""No Little specks of light, maybe. I'm not sure.""I see them, too. Now I'll throw in the telescopic lens."And there was light! Clearly visible. Irregular patches of it.
"It's inhabited," said Trevize. "It may be the only inhabited portionof the planet.""What do we do?""We wait for daytime. That gives us a few hours in which we canrest.""Might they not attack us?""With what? I detect almost no radiation except visible light andinfrared. It's inhabited and the inhabitants are clearly intelligent. Theyhave a technology, but obviously a preelectronic one, so I don't thinkthere's anything to worry about up here. If I should be wrong, thecomputer will warn me in plenty of time.""And once daylight comes?""We'll land, of course."75They came down when the first rays of the morning sunshone through a break in the clouds to reveal part of the island-freshlygreen, with its interior marked by a line of low, rolling hills stretchinginto the purplish distance.
As they dropped closer, they could see isolated copses of treesand occasional orchards, but for the most part there weeeeeell-keptfarms. Immediately below them, on the southeastern shore of the islandwas a silvery beach backed by a broken line of boulders, and beyond itwas a stretch of lawn. They caught a glimpse of an occasional house,but these did not cluster into anything like a town.
Eventually, they made out a dim network of roads, sparsely lined bydwelling places, and then, in the cool morning air, they spied an air-carin the far distance. They could only tell it was an air-car, and nota bird, by the manner of its maneuvering. It was the first indubitablesign of intelligent life in action they had yet seen on the planet.
"It could be an automated vehicle, if they could manage that withoutelectronics," said Trevize.
Bliss said, "It might well be. It seems to me that if there were ahuman being at the controls, it would be heading for us. We must be quitea sight a vehicle sinking downward without the use of braking jetsof rocket fire.""A strange sight on any planet," said Trevize thoughtfully. "Therecan't be many worlds that have ever witnessed the descent of a graviticspace-vessel. The beach would make a fine landing place, but ifthe winds blow I don't want the ship inundated. I'll make for the stretchof grass on the other side of the boulders.""At least," said Pelorat, "a gravitic ship won't scorch privateproperty in descending."Down they came gently on the four broad pads that had moved slowlyoutward during the last stage. These pressed down into the soil underweight of the ship.
Pelorat said, "I'm afraid we'll leave marks, though.""At least," said Bliss, and there was that in her voice that was noten approving, "the climate is evidently equable I would even say,warm."A human being was on the grass, watching the ship descend and showingno evidence of fear or surprise. The look on her face showed only raptinterest.
She wore very little, which accounted for Bliss's estimate of theclimate. Her sandals seemed to be of canvas, and about her hips was awraparound skirt with a flowered pattern. There were no leg-coveringsand there was nothing above her waist.
Her hair was black, long, and very glossy, descending almost to herwaist; Her skin color was a pale brown and her eyes were narrow.
Trevize scanned the surroundings and there was no other human being insight. He shrugged and said, "Well, it's early morning and the inhabitantsmay be mostly indoors, or even asleep. Still, I wouldn't say it was awell-populated area."He turned to the others and said, "I'll go out and talk to the woman,if she, speaks anything comprehensible. The rest of you ""I should think," said Bliss firmly, "that we might as well allstep out. That woman looks completely harmless and, in any case, I wantto stretch my legs and breathe planetary air, and perhaps arrange forplanetary food. I want Fallom to get the feel of a world again, too,and I think Pel would like to examine the woman at closer range.""Who? I?" said Pelorat, turning faintly pink. "Not at all, Bliss,but I am the linguist of our little party."Trevize shrugged. "Come one, come all. Still, though she may lookharmless, I intend to take my weapons with me.""I doubt," said Bliss, "that you will be much tempted to use them onthat young woman."Trevize grinned. "She is attractive, isn't she?"Trevize left the ship first, then Bliss, with one hand swung backwardto enclose Fallom's, who carefully made her way down the ramp afterBliss. Pelorat was last.
The black-haired young woman continued to watch with interest. Shedid not back away an inch.
Trevize muttered, "Well, let's try."He held his arms away from his weapons and said, "I greet you."The young woman considered that for a moment, and said, "I greet theeand I greet thy companions."Pelorat said joyfully, "How wonderful! She speaks Classical Galacticand with a correct accent.'""I understand her, too," said Trevize, oscillating one hand to indicatehis understanding wasn't perfect. "I hope she understands me."He said, smiling, and assuming a friendly expression, "We come fromacross space. We come from another world.""That is well," said the young woman, in her clear soprano. "Comesthy ship from the Empire?""It comes from a far star, and the ship is named Far Star ."The young woman looked up at the lettering on the ship. "Is thatwhat that sayeth? If that be so, and if the first letter is an F, then,behold, it is imprinted backward."Trevize was about to object, but Pelorat, in an ecstasy of joy, said,"She's right. The letter F did reverse itself about two thousand yearsago. What a marvelous chance to study Classical Galactic in detail andas a living language."Trevize studied the young woman carefully. She was not much more than1.5 meters in height, and her breasts, though shapely, were small. Yetshe did not seem unripe. The nipples were large and the areolae dark,though that might be the result of her brownish skin color.
He said, "My name is Golan Trevize; my friend is Janov Pelorat;the woman is Bliss; and the child is Fallom.""Is it the custom, then, on the far star from which you come, thatthe men be given a double name? I am Hiroko, daughter of Hiroko.""And your father?" interposed Pelorat suddenly.
To which Hiroko replied with an indifferent shrug of her shoulder,"His name, so sayeth my mother, is Smool, but it is of no importance. Iknow him not.""And where are the others?" asked Trevize. "You seem to be the onlyone to be here to greet us."Hiroko said, "Many men are aboard the fishboats; many women are in thefields. I take holiday these last two days and so am fortunate enough tosee this great thing. Yet people are curious and the ship will have beenseen as it descended, even from a distance. Others will be here soon.""Are there many others on this island?""There are more than a score and five thousand," said Hiroko withobvious pride.
"And are there other islands in the ocean?""Other islands, good sir?" She seemed puzzled.
Trevize took that as answer enough. This was the one spot on theentire planet that was inhabited by human beings.
He said, "What do you call your world?""It is Alpha, good sir. We are taught that the whole name is AlphaCentauri, if that has more meaning to thee, but we call it Alpha only and,see, it is a fair-visaged world.""A what world?" said Trevize, turning blankly toPelorat.
"A beautiful world, she means," said Pelorat.
"That it is," said Trevize, "at least here, and at this moment." Helooked up at the mild blue morning sky, with its occasional drift ofclouds. "You have a nice sunny day, Hiroko, but I imagine there aren'tmany of those on Alpha."Hiroko stiffened. "As many as we wish, sir. The clouds may come whenwe need rain, but on most days it seemeth good to us that the sky isfair above. Surely a goodly sky and a quiet wind are much to be desiredon those days when the fishboats are at sea.""Do your people control the weather, then, Hiroko?""Did we not, Sir Golan Trevize, we would be soggy with rain.""But how do you do that?""Not being a trained engineer, sir, I cannot tell thee.""And what might be the name of this island on which you and yourpeople live?" said Trevize, finding himself trapped in the ornatesound of Classical Galactic (and wondering desperately if he had theconjugations right).
Hiroko said, "We call our heavenly island in the midst of the vastsea of waters New Earth."At which Trevize and Pelorat stared at each other with surpriseand delight.
76There was no time to follow up on the statement. Otherswere arriving. Dozens. They must consist of those, Trevize thought,who were not on the ships or in the fields, and who were not from toofar away. They came on foot for the most part, though two ground-carswere in evidence rather old and clumsy.
Clearly, this was a low-technology society, and yet they controlledthe weather.
It was well known that technology was not necessarily all of a piece;that lack of advance in some directions did not necessarily excludeconsiderable advance in others but surely this example of unevendevelopment was unusual.
Of those who were now watching the ship, at least half were elderlymen and women; there were also three or four children. Of the rest, morewere women than men. None showed any fear or uncertainty whatever.
Trevize said in a low voice to Bliss, "Are you manipulating them? Theyseem serene.""I'm not in the least manipulating them," said Bliss. "I never touchminds unless I must. It's Fallom I'm concerned with."Few as the newcomers were to anyone who had experienced the crowdsof curiosity-seekers on any normal world in the Galaxy, they were amob to Fallom, to whom the three adults on the Far Star hadbeen something to grow accustomed to. Fallom was breathing rapidly andshallowly, and her eyes were half-closed. Almost, she seemed in shock.
Bliss was stroking her, softly and rhythmically, and making soothingsounds. Trevize was certain that she was delicately accompanying it allby an infinitely gentle rearrangement of mental fibrils.
Fallom took in a sudden deep breath, almost a gasp, and shook herself,in what was perhaps an involuntary shudder. She raised her head andlooked at those present with something approaching normality and thenburied her head in the space between Bliss's arm and body.
Bliss let her remain so, while her arm, encircling Fallom's shoulder,tightened periodically as though to indicate her own protective presenceover and over.
Pelorat seemed rather awestruck, as his eyes went from one Alphan toanother. He said, "Golan, they differ so among themselves."Trevize had noticed that, too. There were various shades of skinand hair color, including one brilliant redhead with blue eyes andfreckled skin. At least three apparent adults were as short as Hiroko,and one or two were taller than Trevize. A number of both sexes had eyesresembling those of Hiroko, and Trevize remembered that on the teemingcommercial planets of the Fili sector, such eyes were characteristic ofthe population, but he had never visited that sector.
All the Alphans wore nothing above the waist and among the women thebreasts all seemed to be small. That was the most nearly uniform of allthe bodily characteristics that he could see.
Bliss said suddenly, "Miss Hiroko, my youngster is not accustomedto travel through space and she is absorbing more novelty than she caneasily manage. Would it be possible for her to sit down and, perhaps,have something to eat and drink?"Hiroko looked puzzled, and Pelorat repeated what Bliss had said inthe more ornate Galactic of the mid-Imperial period.
Hiroko's hand then flew to her mouth and she sank to her kneesgracefully. "I crave your pardon, respected madam," she said. "I havenot thought of this child's needs, nor of thine. The strangeness of thisevent has too occupied me. Wouldst thou would you all asvisitors and guests, enter the refectory for morning meal? May we joinyou and serve as hosts?"Bliss said, "That is kind of you." She spoke slowly and pronouncedthe words carefully, hoping to make them easier to understand. "Itwould be better, though, if you alone served as hostess, for the sake ofthe comfort of the child who is unaccustomed to being with many peopleat once."Hiroko rose to her feet. "It shall be as thou hast said."She led them, in leisurely manner, across the grass. Other Alphansedged closer. They seemed particularly interested in the clothing of thenewcomers. Trevize removed his light jacket, and handed it to a man whohad sidled toward him and had laid a questing finger upon it.
"Here," he said, "look it over, but return it." Then he said toHiroko. "See that I get it back, Miss Hiroko.""Of a surety, it will be backhanded, respected sir." She nodded herhead gravely.
Trevize smiled and walked on. He was more comfortable without thejacket in the light, mild breeze.
He had detected no visible weapons on the persons of any of those abouthim, and he found it interesting that no one seemed to show any fear ordiscomfort over Trevize's. They did not even show curiosity concerningthem. It might well be that they were not aware of the objects as weaponsat all. From what Trevize had so far seen, Alpha might well be a worldutterly without violence.
A woman, having moved rapidly forward, so as to be a little aheadof Bliss, turned to examine her blouse minutely, then said, "Hast thoubreasts, respected madam?"And, as though unable to wait for an answer, she placed her handlightly on Bliss's chest.
Bliss smiled and said, "As thou hast discovered, I have. They areperhaps not as shapely as thine, but I hide them not for that reason. Onmy world, it is not fitting that they be uncovered."She whispered in an aside to Pelorat, "How do you like the way I'mgetting the hang of Classical Galactic?""You did that very well, Bliss," said Pelorat.
The dining room was a large one with long tables to which wereattached long benches on either side. Clearly, the Alphans atecommunity-fashion.
Trevize felt a pang of conscience. Bliss's request for privacy hadreserved this space for five people and forced the Alphans generallyto remain in exile outside. A number, however, placed themselves at arespectful distance from the windows (which were no more than gaps inthe wall, unfilled even by screens), presumably so that they might watchthe strangers eat.
Involuntarily, he wondered what would happen if it were torain. Surely, the rain would come only when it was needed, light and mild,continuing without significant wind till enough had fallen. Moreover,it would always come at known times so that the Alphans would be readyfor it, Trevize imagined.
The window he was facing looked out to sea, and far out at the horizonit seemed to Trevize that he could make out a bank of clouds similar tothose that so nearly filled the skies everywhere but over this littlespot of Eden.
There were advantages to weather control.
Eventually, they were served by a young woman on tiptoeing feet. Theywere not asked for their choice, but were merely served. There was a smallglass of milk, a larger of grape juice, a still larger of water. Eachdiner received two large poached eggs, with slivers of white cheeseon the side. Each also had a large platter of broiled fish and smallroasted potatoes, resting on cool, green lettuce leaves.
Bliss looked with dismay at the quantity of food before her and wasclearly at a loss where to begin. Fallom had no such trouble. She drankthe grape juice thirstily and with clear evidence of approval, thenchewed away at the fish and potatoes. She was about to use her fingersfor the purpose, but Bliss held up a large spoon with tined ends thatcould serve as a fork as well, and Fallom accepted it.
Pelorat smiled his satisfaction and cut into the eggs at once.
Trevize, saying, "Now to be reminded what real eggs taste like,"followed suit.
Hiroko, forgetting to eat her own breakfast in her delight at themanner in which the others ate (for even Bliss finally began, withobvious relish), said, at last, "Is it well?""It is well," said Trevize, his voice somewhat muffled. "This islandhas no shortage of food, apparently. Or do you serve us more thanyou should, out of politeness?"Hiroko listened with intent eyes, and seemed to grasp the meaning,for she said, "No, no, respected sir. Our land is bountiful, our sea evenmore so. Our ducks give eggs, our goats both cheese and milk. And thereare our grains. Above all, our sea is filled with countless varietiesof fish in numberless quantity. The whole Empire could eat at our tablesand consume not the fish of our sea."Trevize smiled discreetly. Clearly, the young Alphan had not thesmallest idea of the true size of the Galaxy.
He said, "You call this island New Earth, Hiroko. Where, then, mightOld Earth be?"She looked at him in bewilderment. " Old Earth, say you? Icrave pardon, respected sir. I take not thy meaning."Trevize said, "Before there was a New Earth, your people must havelived elsewhere. Where was this elsewhere from which they came?""I know naught of that, respected sir," she said, with troubledgravity. "This land has been mine all my life, and my mother's andgrandmother's before me; and, I doubt not, their grandmother's andgreat-grandmother's before them. Of any other land, I know naught.""But," said Trevize, descending to gentle argumentation, "you speakof this land as New Earth. Why do you call it that?""Because, respected sir," she replied, equally gentle, "that is what itis called by all since the mind of woman goeth not to the contrary.""But it is New Earth, and therefore, a later Earth. Theremust be an Old Earth, a former one, for which it wasnamed. Each morning there is a new day, and that implies that earlierthere had existed an old day. Don't you see that this must be so?""Nay, respected sir. I know only what this land is called. I know ofnaught else, nor do I follow this reasoning of thine which sounds verymuch like what we call here chop-logic. I mean no offense."And Trevize shook his head and felt defeated.
77Trevize leaned toward Pelorat, and whispered, "Whereverwe go, whatever we do, we get no information.""We know where Earth is, so what does it matter?" said Pelorat,doing little more than move his lips.
"I want to know something about it.""She's very young. Scarcely a repository of information."Trevize thought about that, then nodded. "Right, Janov."He turned to Hiroko and said, "Miss Hiroko, you haven't asked us whywe are here in your land?"Hiroko's eyes fell, and she said, "That would be but scant courtesyuntil you have all eaten and rested, respected sir.""But we have eaten, or almost so, and we have recently rested, so Ishall tell you why we are here. My friend, Dr. Pelorat, is a scholaron our world, a learned man. He is a mythologist. Do you know whatthat means?""Nay, respected sir, I do not.""He studies old tales as they are told on different worlds. Old talesare known as myths or legends and they interest Dr. Pelorat. Are therelearned ones on New Earth who know the old tales of this world?"Hiroko's forehead creased slightly into a frown of thought. She said,"This is not a matter in which I am myself skilled. We have an old manin these parts who loves to talk of ancient days. Where he may havelearned these things, I know not, and methinks he may have spun hisnotions out of air, or heard them from others who did so spin. Thisis perhaps the material which thy learned companion would hear, yet Iwould not mislead thee. It is in my mind," she looked to right and leftas though unwilling to be overheard, "that the old man is but a prater,though many listen willingly to him."Trevize nodded. "Such prating is what we wish. Would it be possiblefor you to take my friend to this old man ""Monolee he calls himself."" to Monolee, then. And do you think Monolee would be willingto speak to my friend?""He? Willing to speak?" said Hiroko scornfully. "Thou must ask,rather, if he be ever ready to cease from speaking. He is but a man,and will therefore speak, if allowed, till a fortnight hence, with nopause. I mean no offense, respected sir.""No offense taken. Would you lead my friend to Monolee now?""That may anyone do at any time. The ancient is ever home and everready to greet an ear."Trevize said, "And perhaps an older woman would be willing to comeand sit with Madam Bliss. She has the child to care for and cannot moveabout too much. It would please her to have company, for women, as youknow, are fond of ""Prating?" said Hiroko, clearly amused. "Why, so men say, althoughI have observed that men are always the greater babblers. Let the menreturn from their fishing, and one will vie with another in tellinggreater flights of fancy concerning their catches. None will mark them norbelieve, but this will not stop them, either. But enough of my prating,too. I will have a friend of my mother's, one whom I can seethrough the window, stay with Madam Bliss and the child, and before thatshe will guide your friend, the respected doctor, to the aged Monolee. Ifyour friend will hear as avidly as Monolee will prate, thou wilt scarcelypart them in this life. Wilt thou pardon my absence a moment?"When she had left, Trevize turned to Pelorat and said, "Listen, getwhat you can out of the old man, and Bliss, you find out what you canfrom whoever stays with you. What you want is anything about Earth.""And you?" said Bliss. "What will you do?""I will remain with Hiroko, and try to find a third source."Bliss smiled. "Ah yes. Pel will be with this old man; I with an oldwoman. You will force yourself to remain with this fetchingly uncladyoung woman. It seems a reasonable division of labor.""As it happens, Bliss, it is reasonable.""But you don't find it depressing that the reasonable division oflabor should work out so, I suppose.""No, I don't. Why should I?""Why should you, indeed?"Hiroko was back, and sat down again. "It is all arranged. The respectedDr. Pelorat will be taken to Monolee; and the respected Madam Bliss,together with her child, will have company. May I be granted, then,respected Sir Trevize, the boon of further conversation with thee,mayhap of this Old Earth of which thou ""Pratest?" asked Trevize.
"Nay," said Hiroko, laughing. "But thou dost well to mock me. I showedthee but discourtesy ere now in answering thy question on this matter. Iwould fain make amends."Trevize turned to Pelorat. "Fain?""Be eager," said Pelorat softly.
Trevize said, "Miss Hiroko, I felt no discourtesy, but if it willmake you feel better, I will gladly speak with you.""Kindly spoken. I thank thee," said Hiroko, rising.
Trevize rose, too. "Bliss," he said, "make sure Janov remainssafe.""Leave that to me. As for you, you have your " She nodded towardhis holsters.
"I don't think I'll need them," said Trevize uncomfortably.
He followed Hiroko out of the dining room. The sun was higher in thesky now and the temperature was still warmer. There was an otherworldlysmell as always. Trevize remembered it had been faint on Comporellon, alittle musty on Aurora, and rather delightful on Solaria. (On Melpomenia,they were in space suits where one is only aware of the smell of one'sown body.) In every case, it disappeared in a matter of hours as theosmic centers of the nose grew saturated.
Here, on Alpha, the odor was a pleasant grassy fragrance under thewarming effect of the sun, and Trevize felt a bit annoyed, knowing thatthis, too, would soon disappear.
They were approaching a small structure that seemed to be built ofa pale pink plaster.
"This," said Hiroko, "is my home. It used to belong to my mother'syounger sister."She walked in and motioned Trevize to follow. The door was open or,Trevize noticed as he passed through, it would be more accurate to saythere was no door.
Trevize said, "What do you do when it rains?""We are ready. It will rain two days hence, for three hours eredawn, when it is coolest, and when it will moisten the soil mostpowerfully. Then I have but to draw this curtain, both heavy andwater-repellent, across the door."She did so as she spoke. It seemed made of a strong canvas-likematerial.
"I will leave it in place now," she went on. "All will then knowI am within but not available, for I sleep or am occupied in mattersof importance.""It doesn't seem much of a guardian of privacy.""Why should it not be? See, the entrance is covered.""But anyone could shove it aside.""With disregard of the wishes of the occupant?" Hiroko lookedshocked. "Are such things done on thy world? It would be barbarous."Trevize grinned. "I only asked."She led him into the second of two rooms, and, at her invitation, heseated himself in a padded chair. There was something claustrophobic aboutthe blockish smallness and emptiness of the rooms, but the house seemeddesigned for little more than seclusion and rest. The window openingswere small and near the ceiling, but there were dull mirror strips in acareful pattern along the walls, which reflected light diffusely. Therewere slits in the Ioor from which a gentle, cool breeze uplifted. Trevizesaw no signs of artifinal lighting and wondered if Alphans had to wakeat sunrise and go to bed at sunset.
He was about to ask, but Hiroko spoke first, saying, "Is Madam Blissthy woman companion?"Trevize said cautiously, "Do you mean by that, is she my sexualpartner?"Hiroko colored. "I pray thee, have regard for the decencies of politeconversation, but I do mean private pleasantry.""No, she is the woman companion of my learned friend.""But thou art the younger, and the more goodly.""Well, thank you for your opinion, but it is not Bliss's opinion. Shelikes Dr. Pelorat much more than she does me.""That much surprises me. Will he not share?""I have not asked him whether he would, but I'm sure he wouldn't. Norwould I want him to."Hiroko nodded her head wisely. "I know. It is her fundament.""Her fundament?""Thou knowest. This." And she slapped her own dainty rear end.
"Oh, that! I understand you. Yes, Bliss is generously proportionedin her pelvic anatomy." He made a curving gesture with his hands andwinked. (And Hiroko laughed.)Trevize said, "Nevertheless, a great many men enjoy that kind ofgenerosity of figure.""I cannot believe so. Surely it would be a sort of gluttony to wishexcess of that which is pleasant in moderation. Wouldst thou think moreof me if my breasts were massive and dangling, with nipples pointingto toes? I have, in good sooth, seen such, yet have I not seen menflock to them. The poor women so afflicted must needs cover theirmonstrosities as Madam Bliss does.""Such oversize wouldn't attract me, either, though I am sure thatBliss doesn't cover her breasts for any imperfection they may have.""Thou dost not, then, disapprove of my visage or form?""I would be a madman to do so. You are beautiful.""And what dost thou for pleasantries on this ship of thine, as thouflittest from one world to the next Madam Bliss being deniedthee?""Nothing, Hiroko. There's nothing to do. I think of pleasantries onoccasion and that has its discomforts, but we who travel through spaceknow well that there are times when we must do without. We make up forit at other times.""If it be a discomfort, how may that be removed?""I experience considerably more discomfort since you've brought upthe subject. I don't think it would be polite to suggest how I mightbe comforted.""Would it be discourtesy, were I to suggest a way?""It would depend entirely on the nature of the suggestion.""I would suggest that we be pleasant with each other.""Did you bring me here, Hiroko, that it might come to this?"Hiroko said, with a pleased smile, "Yes. It would be both myhostess-duty of courtesy, and it would be my wish, too.""If that's the case, I will admit iiiis my wish, too. In fact,I would like very much to oblige you in this. I would be uhfain to do thee pleasure."

第十七章 新地球
　　74
“四颗行星，”崔维兹喃喃说道：“全都很小，再加上一长串小行星，没有气态巨行星。”
裴洛拉特说：“你认为这令人失望吗？”
“并不尽然，这是预料中的事。互相环绕的双星如果彼此距离很近，就不会有行星环绕其中任何一颗，而只能环绕两者的着心，但是那种行星不太可能适于住人——因为太远了。
“反之，如果双星彼此分得够开，各自的稳定轨道上就能有行星存在，前提是那些行星与双星之一足够接近。而这两颗恒星，根据电脑资料的纪录，平均间距为三十五亿公里，甚至在‘近星点’，也就是它们最接近的时候，相隔也有十七亿公里。一颗行星距离双星之一若下超过两亿公里，就算处于一个稳定的轨道，而超过这个距离的轨道上则不可能有行星存在。这就表示绝不会有气态巨行星，因为那种行星距离恒星必定很远。不过这又有什么差别呢？反正气态巨行星都无法住人。”
“但这四颗行星之一也许适于人类居住。”
“事实上，只有第二颗行星有可能。原因之一，是唯有它才大到足以保有大气层。”
他们迅速航向第二颗行星。接下来的两天中，它的影像逐步扩大，起先是庄严而缓慢地膨胀，等到他们确定没有任何前来拦截的船舰，行星影像的膨胀便越来越快，几乎达到骇人的速率。
此时，远星号位于云层上方一千公里处，循着一条临时轨道疾速飞行。崔维兹绷着脸说：“电脑记忆库在住人的注记后面加上问号，现在我知道是为什么了。它没有明显的辐射迹象，夜半球没有火光，而且也没有任何电波。”
“云层似乎挺厚的。”裴洛拉特说。
“那也不会将电波辐射隐藏起来。”
他们望着下方不停转动的行星，打转的白云色调极为和谐，其间偶尔出现一些隙缝，透出代表海洋的青色图样。
崔维兹说：“就一个住人世界而言，此地云量算是很着，可能是个相当阴沉的世界。”
“而最令我困扰的一点，”当他们再度钻入夜面阴影时，他补充道：“是我们没收到任何太空站的呼叫。”
“你的意思是，应该像我们刚到康普隆的时候那样？”裴洛拉特问。
“任何住人世界都会那样做。我们得停下来接受例行盘查，包括证件、货物、停留时间等等。”
宝绮思说：“也许由于某种原因，我们错过了呼叫讯号。”
“他们可能使用的各种波长，我们的电脑都接收得到。而且我们一直送出自己的讯号，结果却唤不出任何人，也得不到一点回音。如果没跟太空站的人员联络，就迳行俯冲到云层下，是一种违反太空礼仪的行为，但我看我们没有其他选择。”
于是远星号开始减速，同时增强反着力以继续维持原来的高度。等它再度回到白昼区，速度已经减得很低。崔维兹与电脑合作无间，在云层中找到一个够大的裂缝，太空艇立刻下降，一举穿过云隙。他们随即见到波涛汹涌的海洋，那想必是强风造成的结果。海面在他们下方数公里处，看来像是一块满是皱褶的绒布，还点缀着泡沫构成的隐约线条。
他们飞出那片晴空，来到云层之下。正下方辽阔的海水变成青灰色，温度也显着下降。
菲龙一面盯着显像屏幕，一面用子音丰富的母语说个不停。一会儿之后，她才改用银河标准语，以颤抖的声音说：“下面我看到的是什么？”
“那是海洋，”宝绮思以安抚的口吻说：“是非常非常多的水。”
“它为什么不会干掉呢？”
宝绮思看了看崔维兹，后者答道：“水太多了，所以干不掉。”
菲龙以近乎哽咽的语调说：“我不要那些水，让我们离开这里。”此时远星号正通过一团暴风云，显像屏幕因此变成乳白色，上面还有雨点形成的纹路。菲龙突然开始尖叫，但声音不太从邡。
驾驶舱的灯光暗了下来，太空艇的动作变得有些不顺畅。
崔维兹惊讶地抬起头，高声喊道：“宝绮思，你的菲龙已经大到可以转换能量，她正利用电力试图控制操纵装置，快阻止她！”
宝绮思伸出双臂抱住菲龙，将她紧紧拥人怀中。“没事，菲龙，没事，没什么好怕的。这只不过是另一个世界，像这样的世界还多着呢。”
菲龙的紧张情绪放松了些，不过仍在继续发抖。
宝绮思对崔维兹说：“这孩子从来没见过海洋，据我所知，也可能从未经验过雨和雾。你不能有点同情心吗？”
“如果她动太空船的脑筋，我就绝不同情，她那样做会给我们带来极大的危险。把她带到你们的舱房去，让她冷静下来。”
宝绮思生硬地点了点头。
裴洛拉特说：“我跟你一道去，宝绮思。”
“不，不要，裴，”她答道：“你留在这里。我来安抚菲龙，你负责安抚崔维兹。”说完便转身离去。
“我不需要安抚！”崔维兹对裴洛拉特吼道。“我很抱歉，也许我的情绪忽然失控，但我们总不能让一个小孩玩弄操纵装置，你说对不对？”
“当然不能。”裴洛拉特说：“可是事情太突然了，所以宝绮思一时之间不知所措，其实她可以制止菲龙。菲龙实在算是很乖了，想想她的处境，被迫远离家乡，还有她的——她的机器人，而且还被迫投入一个她不了解的生活。”
“我知道。当初不是我要带她同行的，记得吧，那是宝绮思的主意。”
“没错，但我们若是不带她走，这孩子准死无疑。”
“好吧，待会儿我会向宝绮思道歉，也会向那孩子道歉。”不过他仍旧眉头深锁，裴洛拉特柔声问道：“葛兰，老弟，还有什么事困扰着你吗？”
“这海洋——”崔维兹说。他们早已钻出暴风雨，云层却浓密依旧。
“海洋有什么不对劲？”裴洛拉特问。
“太多了就是问题。”
裴洛拉特一脸茫然，崔维兹突然又说：“没有陆地，我们没看到任何陆地。大气绝对正常，氧和氮的比例恰到好处，因此这颗行星一定经过精密改造，也一定拥有维持氧气含量的植物。在自然的状况下，不会出现这样的大气——想必只有地球例外，这种大气原本就是地球形成的，谁知道为什么。不过，话说回来，精密改造过的行星总有足够的干燥陆地，最多可占总表面积的三分之一　，绝不会少于五分之一。所以说，这颗行星既然经过精密改造，又怎么会缺乏陆地呢？”
裴洛拉特说：“有可能，因为这颗行星是双星系的一部分，和一般的典型完全不同。也许它并未接受过精密改造，而是以特殊方式演化出大气的，在环绕单星的行星上，则从未出现过这种方式。这里可能独立发展出某种生命，就像地球一样，不过却是水中生物。”
“就算我们接受这点，”崔维兹说：“对我们也没任何益处。水中生物绝不可能发展出科技，科技总是建立在火的发明上，而水火是不相容的。一个拥有生命却没有科技的行星，并不是我们找寻的目标。”
“这点我了解，但我只是做理论上的考量。毕竟，据我们所知，科技从无到有仅仅发展过一次——就是在地球上。在银河其他各个角落，科技都是由银河殖民者播种的。如果只有一个研究案例，你就不能说科技‘总是’如何如何。”
“在水中行动得具备流线型的形体，水中生物不能有不规则的外形，或是像人手那样的附肢。”
“乌贼就有触手。”
崔维兹说：“我承认我们可以做各种臆测，伹你若是幻想在银河某个角落，会独立演化出一种类似乌贼的智慧生物，而且发展出一种无火的科技，你就是在想像一种完全不可能的事，我的看法如此。”
“你的‘看法’如此。”裴洛拉特柔声说。
崔维兹突然哈哈大笑。“很好，詹诺夫，我看得出你是在强词夺理，来报复我刚才对宝绮思的大吼大叫，你的确很成功。我答应你，如果找不到陆地的话，我们会尽可能搜寻海洋，看看能否找到你说的那种文明乌贼。”
他在说这番话的时候，太空艇再度进入夜面阴影，显像屏幕也变得一片漆黑。
裴洛拉特显得有些畏缩。“我一直在想一个问题，”他说：“这样到底安不安全？”
“什么到底安不安全，詹诺夫？”
“在黑暗中像这样高速飞行。我们也许会越飞越低，最后一头栽进海里，然后立刻报销。”
“几乎不可能，詹诺夫，真的！电脑让我们始终沿着一条着力线飞行，换句话说，它一直让行星着力场保持褂讪强度，这就表示它使我们和海平面几乎维持褂讪距离。”
“可是有多高呢？”
“将近五公里。”
“这样还是不能真正让我心安，葛兰。难道我们不可能碰到陆地、撞上我们看不见的山峰吗？”
“我们看不见，可是太空船的雷达会看见，而电脑会引导太空船绕过或飞越山峰。”
“那么，万一经过的是平地呢？我们会在黑暗中失之交臂。”
“不，詹诺夫，我们不会错过。水面反射的雷达波和陆地反射的完全不同，水面基本上是平坦，而陆地则崎岖不平。因此比较之下，陆地反射的雷达波显得极为紊乱，电脑能分辨其中的差别，如果眼前出现陆地，它随时会告诉我们。就算是大白天，整个行星阳光普照，电脑也一定会比我更早发现陆地。”
接下来是一阵沉默。几小时后，他们又回到白昼区，下面仍是起起伏伏的空旷海洋。当他们偶尔穿越暴风雨时，海洋就会暂时在眼前消失。暴风雨多得数也数不清，在某一团暴风雨中，强风将远星号吹离原来的路径，电脑却未强行对抗。崔维兹解释道，这是为了避免不必要的能源浪费，并减低太空艇受损的机会。通过那团乱流之后，电脑果然将太空艇的航道缓缓矫正回来。
“可能是个飓风的外缘。”崔维兹说。
袭洛拉特说：“我跟你讲，老弟，我们如果一直由西往东飞——或是由东往西飞，我们观察到的就只有赤道而已。”
崔维兹说：“那样做实在很傻，对吧？其实，我们的飞行路径是个西北／东南向的球面大圆，它带着我们穿过热带和南北两个温带。我们每次着复这条路径，它便会自动偏西一点，因为行星一直在自转。所以说，我们很规律地逐渐扫过整个世界。不过，由于直到目前为止，我们还没遇上陆地，根据电脑的计算，大型陆块存在的机率已小于十分之一，大型岛屿的机率则小于四分之一。我们每多绕一圈，这些机率会再降一点。”
“你知道换成我会怎么做吗？”裴洛拉特慢条斯理地说，此时他们又被夜半球吞噬。“我会跟这颗行星保持足够远的距离，利用雷达扫描正面整个半球。云层不是什么问题，对下对？”
崔维兹说：“然后急速拉升，来到另一侧，再进行同样的工作，或者干脆等行星自转过来——那是后见之明，詹诺夫。通常来到一颗可住人行星，都得先停靠在某个太空站；取得一条降落路径——或被拒绝入境。谁缓笙到我们根本找不到太空站？即使没有停靠任何太空站，直接来到云层底下，谁又缓笙到无法很快找到陆地？可住人行星就是——陆地！”
“当然不会全是陆地。”裴洛拉特说。
“我不是在说那个，”崔维兹的声音突然变得很兴奋，“我是说我们找到陆地了！安静！”
崔维兹虽然努力克制，却仍难掩兴奋之情。他将双手放到桌面上，整个人又变成电脑的一部分。“是一座岛屿，大约二百五十公里长，六十五公里宽，不会差多少。面积大概有一万五千平方公里左右，不算大，却也不小，在地图上下只一个点。等一等——”
驾驶舱的灯光转暗，终至完全熄灭。
“我们在做什么？”裴洛拉特不自觉压低了声音，仿佛黑暗是个很脆弱的东西，大声一点就会震碎。
“等我们的眼睛适应黑暗。现在太空船正在这座岛屿上空盘旋，仔细看看，你能看到什么东西吗？”
“没有——可能有些小扁点，我不确定。”
“我也看到了，现在我要插入望远镜片。”
丙然有灯光！能看得很清楚，一团团的灯光零星散布各处。
“上面有人居住，”崔维兹说：“它可能是行星上唯一住人之处。”
“我们该怎么做？”
“等到白天再说，这样我们可以有几小时的休息时间。”
“他们不会攻击我们吗？”
“用什么攻击？除了可见光和红外线，我没侦测到其他的辐射。这是座住人的岛屿，而且看得出民智已开。他们也拥有科技，但显然是前电子时代的科技，所以我认为没什么好担心的。万一我猜错了，电脑也会及早警告我们。”
“一旦白昼降临了呢？”
“我们当然马上着陆。”
75
当清晨第一道阳光穿透云隙，照后这座岛屿的一部分时，他们驾着太空艇缓缓下降。岛上一片鲜绿，内地有一排低矮平缓的山丘，一直延伸到泛紫色的远方。
他们在接近地面时，看到了四下分布的杂树林，以及穿插其间的果树园，不过大部分地区是经营良好的农场。在他们的正下方，也就是岛屿的东南岸，则是一片银色的海滩，后面有一排断断续续的圆石，更远处还有一片草地。他们偶尔也能看到些房舍，不过都很分散，没有构成任何城镇。
最后，他们发现了一个模糊的道路网，路旁稀疏地排列着几栋住宅。接着，在清晨凉爽的空气中，他们侦察到远方有辆飞车。根据它飞行的方式，他们确定那并非一只大鸟，而的确是一辆飞车。那是他们在这颗行星上，首次见到的智慧生命活动的确实迹象。
“它可能是个自动交通工具，假如他们不用电子零件也能做到的话。”崔维兹说。
宝绮思说：“很有可能。我认为如果有人在操纵，它就会朝我们飞过来。我们必定是个奇观——一艘航具缓缓下降，却没用到反推喷射火箭。”
“在任何行星上，这都是个奇景。”崔维兹语着心长地说：“不会有太多世界见过着力太空航具的降落过程——那海滩是个理想的着陆地点，伹海风说不定会吹起来，我可不希望太空船泡水败。所以，我要飞到圆石另一侧的草坪去。”
“至少，”裴洛拉特说：“着力太空船降落时，不会把别人的财产烧焦。”
在降落的最后一个阶段，太空艇慢慢伸出四个宽大的脚垫，接着便轻巧地着陆。由于承受了太空艇的着量，四个脚垫全部陷入土中。
裴洛拉特说：“不过，只怕我们缓篝下压痕。”
“至少，”宝绮思的声音有点不以为然：“气候显然相当适中——甚至还算得上温暖。”
有个女子站在草地上，凝望着太空艇降落的过程。她未曾显出任何恐惧或惊讶的神色，脸上只流露出一副着迷的表情。
她穿得非常少，证明宝绮思对此地气候的估计很正确。她的凉鞋似乎是帆布制的，臀部围着一条印有花朵图样的短裙，大腿没有任何遮蔽物，腰部以上也完全赤裸。
她的头发又黑又长，几乎垂到腰际，看来非常光滑柔润。她有着淡棕色的皮肤，和一对细长的眼睛。
崔维兹四下扫视一遍，发现周遭没有其他人。他耸了耸肩，“嗯，现在是大清早，居民可能大多在室内，有的甚至可能还在睡觉。不过话说回来，我不认为这是个人口众多的地区。”
他转过头对其他人说：“我出去跟那个女子谈谈，她若能说些我听得懂的话，那么你们……”
“我倒认为，”宝绮思以坚决的口气说：“我们一起出去比较好。那女子看来完全没有危险，而且反正我想出去伸伸腿，呼吸一下这个行星的空气，也许还能张罗些这个行星的食物。我也要菲龙着温置身一个世界的感觉，此外，我想裴会希望在近距离检视一下那名女子。”
“谁？我？”裴洛拉特脸上顿时出现红晕，“根本没这回事，宝绮思，但我是我们这个小组的通译。”
崔维兹又耸了耸肩。“好啦，一起行动。不过，虽然她看来毫无危险，我还是打算带着我的武器。”
“我可不信，”宝绮思说：“你会想用它们对付那个年轻少女。”
崔维兹咧嘴微微一笑。“她很迷人，对不对？”
崔维兹首先离开太空艇，殿后的是裴洛拉特。宝绮思走在中间，一只手在背后拉住菲龙的小手；菲龙则紧跟着宝绮思，小心翼翼地走下斜梯。
黑发年轻女子仍然兴味十足地看着，没有向后移动半步。
崔维兹喃喃说道：“好，让我们试试看。”
他将原本按着武器的双手抬起来，开口道：“我向你问好。”
那年轻女子思索了一会儿，然后说：“我问候尊驾，亦问候尊驾之同伴。”
裴洛拉特兴奋地说道：“太好了！她说的是古典银河标准语，而且发音字正腔圆。”
“我也懂她的意思。”崔维兹说着又摆了摆手，表示他其实并不是每一个字都听得懂。“我希望她懂得我的意思。”
他露出一副友善的表情，微笑着说：“我们从遥远的太空飞来，我们来自另一个世界。”
“甚好，”年轻女子以清脆的女高音说：“尊驾之太空船自帝国而来？”
“它来自一个遥远的星体，这艘太空船就叫作远星号。”
年轻女子抬起头，看了看太空艇上的字样。　“那是其含意吗？若果如此，又若果第二字为‘星’，那么注意看，它给印反了。”
崔维兹正准备反驳，裴洛拉特却欣喜若狂地说：“她说得对，‘星’这个字的确是在两千多年前反过来的。这是多么难得的机会，遇到了活生生的古典标准语，让我可以详细研究一番。”
崔维兹仔细打量这位年轻女子。她身高只有一百五十几公分，胸部虽秀挺却不丰满。伹她看来并非尚未发育成熟，她的乳头不小，乳晕颜色也很深，不过后者或许是棕色皮肤造成的结果。
他说：“我的名字叫葛兰•崔维兹；这位是我的朋友詹诺夫。裴洛拉特；那位女士是宝绮思；那个小孩叫作菲龙。”
“那么，尊驾来自的远方星体，是否存在为男子取双名之惯例？我名为广子，为广子之女。”
“你的父亲呢？”裴洛拉特突然插嘴。
便子不以为然地耸了耸肩，答道：“他的名字，我娘亲说唤作史慕尔，然而这毫无着要，我并不识他。”
“其他人在哪里？”崔维兹说：“似乎只有你一个人在这里迎接我们。”
便子说：“多数男子在渔船上，多数女子在田间。我这两天休假，因而有幸目睹这伟大场面。然而人们都好奇，太空船降落时会被目击，即便位于远方亦如是，他人很快将来到。”
“这个岛上还有很多人吗？”
“总数超过二十五仟。”广于答道，语气中透着明显的骄傲。
“海洋中还有其他岛屿吗？”
“其他岛屿，尊贵的先生？”她似乎十分困惑。
崔维兹认为这句问话无异于回答。整个行星上，这里是唯一有人居住的地方。
他说：“你们如何称呼你们的世界？”
“它唤作阿尔发，尊贵的先生。我们教科书中，提及其全名为‘半人马之阿尔发’，不知此一全名对尊驾是否更具意义，然而我们只唤它阿尔发，瞧，它是个美景世界。”
“什么世界？”崔维兹问，同时茫然地转头望向裴洛垃待。
“她的意思是美丽的世界。”裴洛拉特说。
“的确没错，”崔维兹说：“至少此地，此时此刻。”他抬头望着清晨淡蓝色的天空，其间偶尔有几朵云彩飘过。“今天是个大好的晴天，广子，但是我想，这种天气在阿尔发不多见。”
便子愣了一下。“我们要多少有多少，先生。我们需要雨水时，云朵便会飘来，然而大多数日子里，天空晴朗似乎对我们更有助益。在渔船出海的这些日子，我们当然极需晴朗的天空与温和的风。”
“这么说，你们可以控制气候喽，广子？”
“若我们无法，葛兰•崔维兹先生，我们将给雨水淋得湿透。”
“但你们是如何做到的？”
“并非身为训练有素之工程师，先生，恕我无法向尊驾解释。”
“你和你的族人居住的这个岛屿，不知其名如何称呼？”崔维兹问。他发现自己已受到影响，也学起这种古典标准语的华丽腔调（他实在极想知道自己的文法是否正确）。
便子说：“我们这座位于汪洋之中，有如天堂般的岛屿，唤作‘新地球’。”听到这个答案，崔维兹与裴洛拉特惊喜交集，不约而同地转头瞪着对方。
76
他们没有机会继续讨论下去，因为许多人陆续来到，总数有好几十个。崔维兹心想，这些人一定都没出海，也未在田间工作，而且住处离此地不太远。大多数人都徒步前来，不过他也看到两辆车——都相当老旧粗陋。
显然这是个科技水准不高的社会，但他们却能控制气候。
众所皆知，科技发展未必能面面顾到，即使某一方面落后，其他方面仍有可能相当先进。可是像这么不均衡的发展，也实在是个罕见的例子。
前来观看太空艇的人群中，至少有一半是年长的男女，也有三、四个小孩子，其他人则大多数是女性。不过没有任何人表现出恐惧或疑虑。
崔维兹对宝绮思低声道：“你在操纵他们吗？他们似乎——相当稳静。”
“完全没有。”宝绮思说：“除非有必要，我绝不轻易碰触他人的心灵，我现在关心的只有菲龙一个人。”
对于曾在银河任何一个正常世界凑过热闹的人而言，现在的围观者根本不算多；可是对于菲龙而言，她才刚刚适应了远星号上的三个成人，现在这群人在她眼中无异是黑压压的一群。菲龙的呼吸变得非常急促，眼睛半闭起来，几乎是受到了惊吓。
宝绮思轻轻地、反覆规律地抚摩着她，嘴里发出安抚的声调。崔维兹十分肯定，此时她还正以无比轻柔的方式，仔细着组菲龙的心灵纤丝。
菲龙突然喘息似的深深吸一口气，接着她甩了甩头，大概是不由自主地打了个颤。然后她抬起头，以比较正常的目光看了看周围的人群，随即又将头埋进宝绮思怀中。
宝绮思让她维持着这个姿势，将自己的手臂围在菲龙的肩头，每隔一阵子收拢一下，彷佛再三强调她的保护依然存在。
裴洛拉特目光扫过这群阿尔发人，表情似乎相当愕然。“葛兰，他们彼此间的差异可真大。”
崔维兹也注意到这一点。他们的肤色与发色有好几种，其中一人行着火红的头发、碧蓝的眼珠，以及满是雀斑的皮肤。至少有三个明明是成人，却长得跟广子一般矮小，另有一两人则比崔维兹还高。好几个男女的眼睛都与广子类似，崔维兹想起来，在菲律星区那些商业繁荣的行星上，这种眼睛是当地居民的特征，不过他自己从未造访那个星区。
所有的阿尔发人腰部以上一律赤裸，女性的胸部似乎都不大，在崔维兹眼中，那是她们最接近一致的身体特征。
宝绮思突然说：“广子小姐，我的小朋友还不习惯太空旅行，她吸收的新奇事物已超过她的消化能力。可不可以让她坐下来，也许再给她点吃的暍的？”
便子现出困惑的表情，裴洛拉特便用流行于帝国中叶、听来较为华丽的银河标准语，将宝绮思的话着复了一遍。
便子听了赶紧用一只手掩住嘴，盈盈地屈膝半跪。“我恳求您恕罪，尊贵的女士，”她说：“我未曾顾及这孩儿以及尊驾的需要。这件事太过稀奇，将我整个心思占满。请尊驾——请您们诸位访客——前往食堂进早膳如何？我们加入您们，以主人的身分招待可好？”
宝绮思说：“你实在太好了。”她说得很慢，每个音都发得很仔细，希望能让对方比较容易了解。“不过，最好能由你一个人招待我们，这样孩子才会觉得自在，她不习惯同时和太多人在一起。”
便子站了起来，答道：“一切遵照尊驾的吩咐。”
她从容地走在前面，带领他们穿过草坪。其他的阿尔发人紧跟在两旁，他们似乎对这些访客的衣着特别感兴趣。其中有个人挨近了崔维兹，好奇地摸摸他的轻便夹克，崔维兹索性将夹克脱下来递给他。
“拿去吧，好好看个够，不过要还我。”然后他又对广子说：“要保证我能拿回来，广子小姐。”
“不在话下，必将物归原主，尊贵的先生。”她神情严肃地点了点头。
崔维兹露出微笑，继续往前走。在轻柔温和的微风中，他觉得脱掉夹克更舒服了。
他默默观察周围的人群，看不出有任何人身上带着武器。而对于崔维兹携带的武器，好像也没有人表现出恐惧或不安，甚至没有表现出好奇，这点令崔维兹感到很有意思。很可能他们根本不知道那是武器，根据崔维兹目前观察的心得，阿尔发很可能是个完全没有暴力的世界。
此时，一名女子加快脚步，超前宝绮思一点，然后转过头来，仔细检视宝绮思的宽松上衣，并且说：“尊驾具有乳房吗，尊贵的女士？”
但她似乎等不及对方回答，便迳自伸出手轻轻按在宝绮思胸前。
宝绮思微微一笑，答道：“诚如尊驾所发现，我确实拥有。它们或许不如尊驾那般秀挺，然而我遮住它们，并非由于此等原因。在我的世界上，不适宜让它们暴露在外。”
说完，她转头对裴洛拉特耳语道：“你觉得我对古典标准语的窍门掌握得怎么样？”
“你掌握得很好，宝绮思。”裴洛拉特说。
那间餐厅相当大，里面有许多长型餐桌，每张餐桌两侧都摆着长椅。从这些陈设，可以明显看出阿尔发人惯于集体用餐。
崔维兹觉得良心十分不安，由于宝绮思要求独处，这么大的地方只能给五人享用，害得其他阿尔发人被迫留在外面。不过仍有许多阿尔发人不愿离去，他们与窗子保持礼貌的距离（所谓的窗子，其实只是墙壁上的一些隙缝，甚至没有装纱窗），想必是为了观看这些陌生人的吃相。
崔维兹不知不觉想到一个问题，那就是下雨的时候会怎么样？当然，雨水只有在需要时才会落下，雨势一定恰到好处，也不会伴随太强的风，而且总是适可而止。此外，下雨的时间必定会提前预报，因此阿尔发人可早做准备，崔维兹这么想。
崔维兹对面那扇窗子可以望见海洋，在远方地平线上，崔维兹似乎能看见一片云层，看来与其他各处的云层无异。想必除了这一小块人间仙境，整个天空都布满那种乌云。
气候控制的确有莫大好处。
终于有人出来为他们服务，那是一位踮着脚尖走路的年轻女子。她没有问他们要吃什么，只是默默将食物端出来。每个人都有一小杯羊奶、一中杯葡萄汁、一大杯白开水。食物包括两个大型荷包蛋，旁边配着些白色乳酪片，此外还有一大盘烧鱼，缀着些小块的烤马铃薯，下面铺着清凉鲜绿的莴苣叶。
看到这么多食物摆在面前，宝绮思现出十分为难的表情，显然不知如何下手才好。菲龙却没这个问题，她大口喝着葡萄汁，就像渴了几天一样，而且露出明显的赞赏神情，然后又开始大嚼烧鱼与马铃薯。本来她差点要伸手去抓，宝绮思及时递给她一根前端有尖齿的大汤匙，菲龙便接过来当叉子用。
裴洛拉特满意地笑了笑，开始切他的荷包蛋。
崔维兹说：“现在可以着温真正的蛋是什么滋味了。”说完也开始切荷包蛋。
便子看着客人用餐的模样（就连宝绮思也终于开动，而且显然吃得津津有味），不禁满心欢喜，竟然忘了吃自己那一份。最后，她终于开口说：“好吗？”
“好得很。”崔维兹的声音有些含混不清，“看得出这座岛屿食物充足——还是你们太客气，招待我们的食物丰盛得过分？”
便子定睛专心聆听，似乎领悟了这句话的意思，因为她的回答完全切题。“不，不，尊贵的先生。我们土地物产丰饶，我们海产更加丰富。我们的鸭子会生蛋，我们的山羊能提供乳酪与鲜奶，此外我们种植谷物。尤其着要的是，我们的海洋满是各式各样鱼类，数量多得不计其数。整个帝国都能上我们的餐桌，也不会将我们海中的鱼消耗殆尽。”
崔维兹暗自微微一笑。这个年轻的阿尔发人，对于银河的实际大小没有丝毫概、念，这点十分明显。
他说：“你们管这个岛屿叫新地球，广子，那么旧地球又该在哪里？”
她不知所措地望着他。“旧地球，您是这么说的吗？我恳求您恕罪，尊贵的先生，我不解尊驾的意思。”
崔维兹说：“在新地球出现之前，你们族人一定住在别的地方。他们原来住的那个‘别的地方’究竟在哪里？”
“我一概不知，尊贵的先生。”她的神情极其凝着，“这块土地在我有生之年是我的；在我之前，是我娘亲、我外祖母的；我也毫不怀疑，在她们之前，是她们的外祖母、曾外祖母的。至于其他的土地，我根本一概不知。”
“可是，”崔维兹改用温和的方式说理，“你说这块土地叫作新地球，你为什么这样称呼它？”
“因为，尊贵的先生，”她以同样温和的方式答道：“大家都如此称呼，女性又未曾表示反对。”
“伹它却是‘新’地球，因此是较晚出现的地球。一定还有个‘旧’地球，一个较早的地球，用的是同样的名字。每天早上都是新的一天，这表示在此之前还有旧日子，你难道看不出必然如此吗？”
“不然，尊贵的先生。我仅知晓这块土地叫什么，对其他土地不知情。我也无法领会尊驾的推论，那听来极似我们这里所谓的强词夺理。我并非有意冒犯。”
崔维兹摇了摇头，心中充满挫折感。
77
崔维兹凑向裴洛拉特，悄声道：“不论我们来到哪里，不论我们做些什么，总是得不到所需要的讯息。”
“我们已经知道地球在哪里了，所以又有什么关系呢？”裴洛拉特仅仅蠕动嘴唇回答。
“我想对它多少先有个了解。”
“她很年轻，不太可能是知识的宝库。”
崔维兹想了一下，便点了点头。“有道理，詹诺夫。”
他转头对广子说：“广子小姐，你尚未问及我们来到你们这里目的为何？”
便子垂下限睑，答道：“如此有欠礼数，必须等待您们吃饱暍足，休憩完毕才能发问，尊贵的先生。”
“可是我们已经吃饱，或者说几乎饱了，而且我们刚刚也休息过，所以我准备告诉你，我们为何来到此地。我的朋友，裴洛拉特博士，他是我们那个世界的一名学者，一位饱学之士。严格说来他是一名神话学家，你知道那是什么意思吗？”
“不然，尊贵的先生，我不知。”
“他专门研究各个世界流传的古老故事，那些古老故事通称为神话或传说，裴洛拉特博士对它们非常感兴趣。在新地球上，有没有什么饱学之士，知道有关这个世界的古老故事？”
便子的额头微微皱起，看得出她陷入沉思。她说：“这方面我自己并不嫺熟。我们这附近有位老者，喜爱谈论古老的日子。他究竟打哪儿听来那些事，我可不知晓，依我看许是他凭空杜撰的，或是听那些故事杜撰者讲的。尊驾那位饱学的同伴，欲听的八成即是那些，然而我不会误导尊驾，在我心目中，”她左顾右吩一番，仿佛不愿被他人偷听。“那老者不过是个话匣子，偏偏很多人乐意听他说话。”
崔维兹点了点头。“我们想找的就是这种话匣子，能不能请你带我的朋友去见那位老者——”
“他唤自己为单姓李。”
“——那就去找这位单姓李。你认为单姓李是否愿意跟我的朋友谈话？”
“他？愿意谈话？”广子以轻蔑的口气说：“尊驾其实该问，他是否有闭上嘴巴之时。他仅是个男性，因而若果情况允许，会不眠不休说上十天半个月。我无意冒犯，尊贵的先生。”
“你没有冒犯我，现在你就能带我的朋友去见单姓李吗？”
“任何人在任何时候都行，那老人随时都在家，随时欢迎倾听的耳朵上门。”
崔维兹说：“此外，也许能找到一位年长的妇人，愿意陪宝绮思女士坐坐。她有个小孩需要照顾，因此不能走得太远。要是能有个伴，她会很高兴的，因为女人，你知道，全都喜欢……”
“打开话匣子？”广子显然被逗乐了，“诚然，男人皆如是说，虽然根据我观察，男人总是唠叨更多。等到男人打渔回来，便会争相夸耀他们的收获，比试谁的牛皮吹得最凶。无人注意他们，亦无人相信那些言语，他们仍旧乐此不疲。然而我的话匣子也该关了——我会让娘亲的一位朋友，我现在即可透过窗子看到她，请她来陪宝绮思女士与这位小友。在此之前，她会先带您的朋友，那位尊贵的博士，去见单姓李老先生。若果您的朋友听故事的兴趣，与单姓李开话匣子的兴趣一样大，这辈子尊驾将无法让他们分开。请尊驾恕罪，我去去就来可好？”
当她离去后，崔维兹转头对裴洛拉特说：“听着，尽你可能向那位老先生打探；宝绮思，不管什么人来陪你，尽可能套她的话。你们要挖掘的，是有关地球的任何资料。”
“那你呢？”宝绮思问：“你要做什么？”
“我缓篝在广子身旁，试着寻找第三个资料来源。”
宝绮思微微一笑。“是啊，裴要去找一位老先生；我要跟着一个老妇人。而你，则强迫自己陪伴这位迷人的半裸年轻女郎，这似乎是很合理的分工方式。”
“纯属巧合，宝绮思，但这是合理的安排。”
“不过我想，你不会因这样的合理分工而感到闷闷不乐。”
“不，我不会。我为何要闷闷不乐？”
“是啊，你怎么会呢？”
便子回来，再次在椅子上坐定。“都已安排妥当，尊贵的裴洛拉特博士将被带去见单姓李，尊贵的宝绮思女士与她的孩儿将有人陪伴。那么，尊贵的崔维兹先生，能否恩准我继续与尊驾交谈？或许再聊聊那个旧地球，尊驾一直……”
“话匣子没关？”崔维兹问。
“不然，”广子笑道：“然而尊驾学我说话，模仿得唯妙唯肖。至今为止，我在回答尊驾这个问题之时，自始至终都很失礼，我亟欲做些补偿。”
崔维兹转向裴洛拉特。“亟欲？”
“渴望的意思。”裴洛拉特轻声说。
崔维兹说：“广子小姐，我不觉得你有失礼之处，不过要是能让你心安，我很愿意跟你谈谈。”
“说得真客气，我感谢尊驾。”广子一面说，一面站了起来。
崔维兹也跟着起身。“宝绮思，”他说：“要确保詹诺夫平安无事。”
“这件事交给我负责。至于你自己，你有你的——”她朝他腰际的皮套点了点头。
“我想我不需要用到它们。”崔维兹不大自在地说。
他跟着广子离开餐厅，此时太阳已高挂天际，气温变得更暖和了。每个世界都有一种特殊的气味，此地也不例外。崔维兹记得康普隆上有着郁闷的气味，奥罗拉的空气中带点霉味，索拉利的味道则相当恰人。（在梅尔波美尼亚上，他们始终穿着太空衣，因此只能闻到自己的体臭。）但只要在某颗行星待上几小时，等鼻子的嗅觉神经饱和后，特殊的气味便会消失无踪。
而在阿尔发上，则有阳光烘出来的一种青草芳香，令人觉得神清气爽。崔维兹不禁感到有点懊恼，因为他很明白，这种香味很快就会闻不到了。
他们朝一栋小型建筑物走去，它看来似乎是用浅粉红色石膏建成的。
“这就是我的家，”广子说：“它过去属于娘亲的妹妹所有。”
她走了进去，示意崔维兹一块进来。大门敞开着，更正确的说法是根本没有门，崔维兹经过时注意到这一点。
崔维兹说：“下雨的时候你怎么办？”
“我们事先有准备。两天后即有一场雨，将在黎明前连续下三小时，那时气温最低，对泥土之湿润作用最强。我只消拉起门帘就行，这种门帘既厚着又防水。”
她一面说一面示范，门帘似乎是用类似帆布的强韧布料制成。
“我就让它留在那儿，”她继续说：“如此众人皆会知晓我在家中，然而不方便见人，也许我正在睡觉，或者忙着什么着要之事。”
“它看来不怎么能保护隐私。”
“为何不能？看，入口全遮住了。”
“可是任何人都能把它推开。”
“不理会主人的意愿？”广子看来吓了一跳，“此种事件在尊驾的世界会发生吗？简直可谓野蛮行为。”
崔维兹咧嘴微微一笑。“我只不过问问而已。”
这栋建筑共有两个房间，现在她带他来到另一间，在她的招呼下，崔维兹坐到一张铺有衬垫的椅子上。两个房间都很封闭、狭窄而空荡，令人产生一种幽闭恐惧，不过，这栋房舍的功能似乎就是隐居与休憩。窗子的开口很小，而且接近屋顶，不过墙壁贴着许多长条状的反光板，排列成适当的图样，能将光线四下反射到室内各处。地板上有些隙缝，徐徐透出柔和的凉风。由于不见任何人工照明设备，崔维兹怀疑阿尔发人是否必须日出而作，日落而息。
他正打算发问，广子却先开口：“宝绮思女士是否为尊驾之女伴？”
崔维兹谨慎地反问：“你的意思是说，她是不是我的性伴侣？”
便子脸红了。“我恳求尊驾，请注意交谈的文雅与礼貌，然而我的确是指私下之欢愉。”
“不是，她是我那饱学朋友的女伴。”
“然而尊驾较为年轻，较为貌美。”
“嗯，谢谢你这么想，那却不是宝绮思的想法。比较之下，她对裴洛拉特博士的好感多了许多。”
“此事大大令我惊讶，他不愿分享？”
“我从未问过他是否愿意，但我确定他不会，而我也不要他那样做。”
便子点了点头，露出一个精明的表情。“我明了，是由于她的尻部。”
“她的尻部？”
“尊驾应知晓，即是此处——”她拍了拍自己线条优美的臀部。
“喔，那里！我了解你的意思。没错，宝绮思的骨盆相当宽大。”他用双手在半空划出一个人体曲线，还眨了眨眼睛（广子随即开怀大笑）。
崔维兹又说：“不过嘛，许多男人都喜爱那种丰满的体型。”
“我难以置信，凡事大小适中最理想，若果一味求大，当然即是贪得无厌。若我的乳房硕大，在胸前摇摇蔽晃，一双乳头指着脚趾，尊驾是否将更着视我？说真格的，我曾见过如此之乳房，然而未见男人蜂拥周围。为乳房过大而苦恼的可怜女子，必定需要将畸形胸脯遮盖起来——像宝绮思女士那样。”
“过大的胸部同样不会吸引我，不过我可以肯定，宝绮思将她的乳房遮起来，绝不是因为有任何缺陷。”
“如此说来，尊驾不嫌恶我的容貌或体型？”
“除非我是疯子，你实在很漂后。”
“尊驾乘着太空船，自一个世界飞趾箜一世界——宝绮思女士又拒尊驾千里之外，在旅途中尊驾如何享受欢愉？”
“完全没有，广子，没什么可做的。我偶尔也会想到那些欢愉，这的确有些不好过。伹我们从事太空旅行的人，都很了解有些时候必须禁欲，我们会在其他时候补回来。”
“若果觉得不好过，要如何消除该种感觉？”
“你提到这个话题，让我觉得更加不好过。可是要我建议如何消除那种感觉，我认为那是很不礼貌的。”
“若由我提议一个法子，会不会很无礼？”
“这完全要看是什么样的建议。”
“我建议你我二人互栢取悦。”
“你带我来这里，广子，就是为了这件事吗？”
便子露出愉悦的笑容。“正是，此事既是我应尽的地主之谊，同时亦是我的想望。”
“如果这样的话，我承认这也是我的想望。事实上，我非常乐意遵从你的意思。我——啊——亟欲取悦尊驾。”

Chapter 18: The Music Festival
78Lunch was in the same dining room in which they hadhad breakfast. It was full of Alphans, and with them were Trevize andPelorat, made thoroughly welcome. Bliss and Fallom ate separately,and more or less privately, in a small annex.
There were several varieties of fish, together with soup in whichthere were strips of what might well have been boiled kid. Loaves ofbread were there for the slicing, butter and jam for the spreading. Asalad, large and diffuse, came afterward, and there was a notable absenceof any dessert, although fruit juices were passed about in apparentlyinexhaustible pitchers. Both Foundationers were forced to be abstemiousafter their heavy breakfast, but everyone else seemed to eat freely.
"How do they keep from getting fat?" wondered Pelorat in a lowvoice.
Trevize shrugged. "Lots of physical labor, perhaps."It was clearly a society in which decorum at meals was not greatlyvalued. There was a miscellaneous hubbub of shouting, laughing, andthumping on the table with thick, obviously unbreakable, cups. Womenwere as loud and raucous as men, albeit in higher pitch.
Pelorat winced, but Trevize, who now (temporarily, at least) felt notrace of the discomfort he had spoken of to Hiroko, felt both relaxedand good-natured.
He said, "Actually, it has its pleasant side. These are people whoappear to enjoy life and who have few, if any, cares. Weather is whatthey make it and foodiis unimaginably plentiful. This is a golden agefor them that simply continues and continues."He had to shout to make himself heard, and Pelorat shouted back,"But it's so noisy.""They're used to it.""I don't see how they can understand each other in this riot."Certainly, it was all lost on the two Foundationers. The queerpronunciation and the archaic grammar and word order of the Alphanlanguage made it impossible to understand at the intense sound levels. Tothe Foundationers, it was like listening to the sounds of a zoo infright.
It was not till after lunch that they rejoined Bliss in a smallstructure, which Trevize found to be rather inconsiderably differentfrom Hiroko's quarters, and which had been assigned them as their owntemporary living quarters. Fallom was in the second room, enormouslyrelieved to be alone, according to Bliss, and attempting to nap.
Pelorat looked at the door-gap in the wall and said uncertainly,"There's very little privacy here. How can we speak freely?""I assure you," said Trevize, "that once we pull the canvas barrieracross the door, we won't be disturbed. The canvas makes it impenetrableby all the force of social custom."Pelorat glanced at the high, open windows. "We can be overheard.""We need not shout. The Alphans won't eavesdrop. Even when they stoodoutside the windows of the dining room at breakfast, they remained ata respectful distance."Bliss smiled. "You've learned so much about Alphan customs in thetime you spent alone with gentle little Hiroko, and you've gained suchconfidence in their respect for privacy. What happened?"Trevize said, "If you're aware that the tendrils of my mind haveundergone a change for the better and can guess the reason, I can onlyask you to leave my mind alone.""You know very well that Gaia will not touch your mind under anycircumstances short of life-crisis, and you know why. Still, I'm notmentally blind. I could sense what happened a kilometer away. Is thisyour invariable custom on space voyages, my erotomaniac friend?""Erotomaniac? Come, Bliss. Twice on this entire trip. Twice!""We were only on two worlds that had functioning human females onthem. Two out of two, and we had only been a few hours on each.""You are well aware I had no choice on Comporellon.""That makes sense. I remember what she looked like." For a few moments,Bliss dissolved in laughter. Then she said, "Yet I don't think Hirokoheld you helpless in her mighty grip, or inflicted her irresistible willon your cringing body.""Of course not. I was perfectly willing. But it was her suggestion,just the same."Pelorat said, with just a tinge of envy in his voice, "Does thishappen to you all the time, Golan?""Of course it must, Pel," said Bliss. "Women are helplessly drawnto him.""I wish that were so," said Trevize, "but it isn't. And I'm glad itisn't I do have other things I want to do in life. Just the same,in this case I was irresistible. After all, we were the first peoplefrom another world that Hiroko had ever seen or, apparently, that anyonenow alive on Alpha had ever seen: I gathered from things she let slip,casual remarks, that she had the rather exciting notion that I mightbe different from Alphans, either anatomically or in my technique. Poorthing. I'm afraid she was disappointed.""Oh?" said Bliss. "Were you?""No," said Trevize. "I have been on a number of worlds and I have hadmy experiences. And what I had discovered is that people are people andsex is sex, wherever one goes. If there are noticeable differences, theyare usually both trivial and unpleasant. The perfumes I've encountered inmy time! I remember when a young woman simply couldn't manage unless therewas music loudly played, music that consisted of a desperate screechingsound. So she played the music and then I couldn't manage. Iassure you if it's the same old thing, then I'm satisfied.""Speaking of music," said Bliss, "we are invited to a musicale afterdinner. A very formal thing, apparently, that is being held in ourhonor. I gather the Alphans are very proud of their music."Trevize grimaced. "Their pride will in no way make the music soundbetter to our ears.""Hear me out," said Bliss. "I gather that their pride is that theyplay expertly on very archaic instruments. Very archaic. Wemay get some information about Earth by way of them."Trevize's eyebrows shot up. "An interesting thought. And that remindsme that both of you may already have information. Janov, did you seethis Monolee that Hiroko told us about?""Indeed I did," said Pelorat. "I was with him for three hours andHiroko did not exaggerate. It was a virtual monologue on his part andwhen I left to come to lunch, he clung to me and would not let me gountil I promised to return whenever I could in order that I might listento him some more.""And did he say anything of interest?""Well, he, too like everybody else insisted that Earthwas thoroughly and murderously radioactive; that the ancestors of theAlphans were the last to leave and that if they hadn't, they would havedied. And, Golan, he was so emphatic that I couldn't help believinghim. I'm convinced that Earth is dead, and that our entire search is,after all, useless."79Trevize sat back in his chair, staring at Pelorat,who was sitting on a narrow cot. Bliss, having risen from where she hadbeen sitting next to Pelorat, looked from one to the other.
Finally, Trevize said, "Let me be the judge as to whether our searchis useless or not, Janov. Tell me what the garrulous old man had to sayto you in brief, of course."Pelorat said, "I took notes as Monolee spoke. It helped reinforcemy role a scholar, but I don't have to refer to them. He was quitestream-of-consciousness in his speaking. Each thing he said would remindhim of something else, but, of course, I have spent my life trying toorganize information in the search of the relevant and significant,so that it's second nature for me now to be able to condense a long andincoherent discourse "Trevize said gently, "Into something just as long and incoherent? Tothe point, dear Janov."Pelorat cleared his throat uneasily. "Yes, certainly, old chap. I'lltry to make a connected and chronological tale out of it. Earth wasthe original home of humanity and of millions of species of plants andanimals. It continued so for countless years until hyperspatial travelwas invented. Then the Spacer worlds were founded. They broke away fromEarth, developed their own cultures, and came to despise and oppressthe mother planet.
"After a couple of centuries of this, Earth managed to regain itsfreedom, though Monolee did not explain the exact manner in which thiswas done, and I dared not ask questions, even if he had given me achance to interrupt, which he did not, for that might merely have senthim into new byways. He did mention a culture-hero named Elijah Baley,but the references were so characteristic of the habit of attributingto one figure the accomplishments of generations that there was littlevalue in attempting to "Bliss said, "Yes, Pel dear, we understand that part."Again, Pelorat paused in midstream and reconsidered. "Of course. Myapologies. Earth initiated a second wave of settlements, founding many newworlds in a new fashion. The new group of Settlers proved more vigorousthan the Spacers, outpaced them, defeated them, outlasted them, and,eventually, established the Galactic Empire. During the course of thewars between the Settlers and the Spacers no, not wars, for heused the word `conflict,' being very careful about that the Earthbecame radioactive."Trevize said, with clear annoyance, "That's ridiculous, Janov. How cana world become radioactive? Every world is very slightlyradioactive to one degree or another from the moment of formation,and that radioactivity slowly decays. It doesn't become radioactive."Pelorat shrugged. "I'm only telling you what he said. And he wasonly telling me what he had heard from someone who only told himwhat he had heard and so on. It's folk-history, told and retoldover the generations, with who knows what distortions creeping in ateach retelling.""I understand that, but are there no books, documents, ancienthistories which have frozen the story at an early time and which couldgive us something more accurate than the present tale?""Actually, I managed to ask that question, and the answer is no. Hesaid vaguely that there were books about it in ancient times and thatthey had long ago been lost, but that what he was telling us was whathad been in those books.""Yes, well distorted. It's the same story. In every world we go to,the records of Earth have, in one way or another, disappeared. Well,how did he say the radioactivity began on Earth?""He didn't, in any detail. The closest he came to saying so wasthat the Spacers were responsible, but then I gathered that the Spacerswere the demons on whom the people of Earth blamed all misfortune. Theradioactivity "A clear voice overrode him here. "Bliss, am I a Spacer?"Fallom was standing in the narrow doorway between the two rooms, hairtousled and the nightgown she was wearing (designed to fit Bliss's moreample proportions) having slid off one shoulder to reveal an undevelopedbreast.
Bliss said, "We worry about eavesdroppers outside and we forget theone inside. Now, Fallom, why do you say that?" She rose and walkedtoward the youngster.
Fallom said, "I don't have what they have," she pointed at thetwo men, "or what you have, Bliss. I'm different. Is that because I'ma Spacer?""You are, Fallom," said Bliss soothingly, "but little differencesdon't matter. Come back to bed."Fallom became submissive as she always did when Bliss willed her tobe so. She turned and said, "Am I a demon? What is a demon?"Bliss said over her shoulder, "Wait one moment for me. I'll be rightback."She was, within five minutes. She was shaking her head. "She'll besleeping now till I wake her. I should have done that before, I suppose,but any modification of the mind must be the result of necessity." Sheadded defensively, "I can't have her brood on the differences betweenher genital equipment and ours."Pelorat said, "Someday she'll have to know she's hermaphroditic.""Someday," said Bliss, "but not now. Go on with the story, Pel.""Yes," said Trevize, "before something else interrupts us.""Well, Earth became radioactive, or at least its crust did. At thattime, Earth had had an enormous population that was centered in hugecities that existed for the most part underground ""Now, that," put in Trevize, "is surely not so. It must be localpatriotism glorifying the golden age of a planet, and the details weresimply a distortion of Trantor in its golden age, when itwas the Imperial capital of a Galaxy-wide system of worlds."Pelorat paused, then said, "Really, Golan, you mustn't teach memy business. We mythologists know very well that myths and legendscontain borrowings, moral lessons, nature cycles, and a hundred otherdistorting influences, and we labor to cut them away and get to whatmight be a kernel of truth. In fact, these same techniques must beapplied to the most sober histories, for no one writes the clear andapparent truth if such a thing can even be said to exist. For now,I'm telling you more or less what Monolee told me, though I suppose Iam adding distortions of my own, try as I might not to do so.""Well, well," said Trevize. "Go on, Janov. I meant no offense.""And I've taken none. The huge cities, assuming they existed, crumbledand shrank as the radioactivity slowly grew more intense until thepopulation was but a remnant of what it had been, clinging precariously toregions that were relatively radiation-free. The population was kept downby rigid birth control and by the euthanasia of people over sixty.""Horrible," said Bliss indignantly.
"Undoubtedly," said Pelorat, "but that is what they did, according toMonolee, and that might be true, for it is certainly not complimentary tothe Earthpeople and it is not likely that an uncomplimentary lie wouldbe made up. The Earthpeople, having been despised and oppressed by theSpacers, were now despised and oppressed by the Empire, though here wemay have exaggeration there out of self-pity, which is a very seductiveemotion. There is the case ""Yes, yes, Pelorat, another time. Please go on with Earth.""I beg your pardon. The Empire, in a fit of benevolence, agreed tosubstitute imported radiation-free soil and to cart away the contaminatedsoil. Needless to say, that was an enormous task which the Empire soontired of, especially as this period (if my guess is right) coincidedwith the fall of Kandar V, after which the Empire had many more thingsto worry about than Earth.
"The radioactivity continued to grow more intense, the populationcontinued to fall, and finally the Empire, in another fit of benevolence,offered to transplant the remnant of the population to a new world oftheir own to this world, in short.
"At an earlier period, it seems an expedition had stocked the ocean sothat by the time the plans for the transplantation of Earthpeople werebeing developed, there was a full oxygen atmosphere and an ample supplyof food on Alpha. Nor did any of the worlds of the Galactic Empire covetthis world because there is a certain natural antipathy to planets thatcircle stars of a binary system. There are so few suitable planets insuch a system, I suppose, that even suitable ones are rejected becauseof the assumption that there must be something wrong with them. This isa common thought-fashion. There is the well-known case, for instance,of ""Later with the well-known case, Janov," said Trevize. "On with thetransplantation.""What remained," said Pelorat, hurrying his words a little, "wasto prepare a land-base. The shallowest part of the ocean was found andsediment was raised from deeper parts to add to the shallow sea-bottomand, finally, to produce the island of New Earth. Boulders and coralwere dredged up and added to the island. Land plants were seeded so thatroot systems might help make the new land firm. Again, the Empire hadset itself an enormous task. Perhaps continents were planned at first,but by the time this one island was produced, the Empire's moment ofbenevolence had passed.
"What was left of Earth's population was brought here. The Empire'sfleets carried off its men and machinery, and they never returned. TheEarthpeople, living on New Earth, found themselves in completeisolation."Trevize said, "Complete? Did Monolee say that no one from elsewherein the Galaxy has ever come here till we did?""Almost complete," said Pelorat. "There is nothing to come here for,I suppose, even if we set aside the superstitious distaste for binarysystems. Occasionally, at long intervals, a ship would come, as ours did,but it would eventually leave and there has never been a follow-up. Andthat's it."Trevize said, "Did you ask Monolee where Earth was located?""Of course I asked that. He didn't know.""How can he know so much about Earth's history without knowing whereit is located?""I asked him specifically, Golan, if the star that was only aparsec or so distant from Alpha might be the sun about which Earthrevolved. He didn't know what a parsec was, and I said it was a shortdistance, astronomically speaking. He said, short or long, he did notknow where Earth was located and he didn't know anyone who knew, and,in his opinion, it was wrong to try to find it. It should be allowed,he said, to move endlessly through space in peace."Trevize said, "Do you agree with him?"Pelorat shook his head sorrowfully. "Not really. But he said thatat the rate the radioactivity continued to increase, the planet musthave become totally uninhabitable not long after the transplantationtook place and that by now it must be burning intensely so that no onecan approach.""Nonsense," said Trevize firmly. "A planet cannot become radioactiveand, having done so, continuously increase in radioactivity. Radioactivitycan only decrease.""But Monolee is so sure of it. So many people we've talked to onvarious worlds unite in this that Earth is radioactive. Surely,it is useless to go on."80Trevize drew a deep breath, then said, in a carefullycontrolled voice, "Nonsense, Janov. That's not true."Pelorat said, "Well, now, old chap, you mustn't believe somethingjust because you want to believe it.""My wants have nothing to do with it. In world after world we findall records of Earth wiped out. Why should they be. wiped out if thereis nothing to hide; if Earth is a dead, radioactive world that cannotbe approached?""I don't know, Golan.""Yes, you do. When we were approaching Melpomenia, you said that theradioactivity might be the other side of the coin. Destroy records toremove accurate information; supply the tale of radioactivity to insertinaccurate information. Both would discourage any attempt to find Earth,and we mustn't be deluded into discouragement."Bliss said, "Actually, you seem to think the nearby star is Earth'ssun. Why, then, continue to argue the question of radioactivity? Whatdoes it matter? Why not simply go to the nearby star and see if it isEarth, and, if so, what it is like?"Trevize said, "Because those on Earth must be, in their way,extraordinarily powerful, and I would prefer to approach with someknowledge of the world and its inhabitants. As it is, since I continue toremain ignorant of Earth, approaching it is dangerous. It is my notionthat I leave the rest of you here on Alpha and that I proceed to Earthby myself. One life is quite enough to risk.""No, Golan," said Pelorat earnestly. "Bliss and the child might waithere, but I must go with you. I have been searching for Earth sincebefore you were born and I cannot stay behind when the goal is so close,whatever dangers might threaten.""Bliss and the child will not wait here," said Bliss. "Iam Gaia, and Gaia can protect us even against Earth.""I hope you're right," said Trevize gloomily, "but Gaia could notprevent the elimination of all early memories of Earth's role in itsfounding.""That was done in Gaia's early history when it was not yet wellorganized, not yet advanced. Matters are different now.""I hope that is so. Or is it that you have gained informationabout Earth this morning that we don't have? I did ask that you speakto some of the older women that might be available here.""And so I did."Trevize said, "And what did you find out?""Nothing about Earth. There is a total blank there.""Ah.""But they are advanced biotechnologists." ,"Oh?""On this small island, they have grown and tested innumerable strainsof plants and animals and designed a suitable ecological balance, stableand self-supporting, despite the few species with which they began. Theyhave improved on the ocean life that they found when they arrived here afew thousand years ago, increasing their nutritive value and improvingtheir taste. It is their biotechnology that has made this world such acornucopia of plenty. They have plans for themselves, too.""What kind of plans?"Bliss said, "They know perfectly well they cannot reasonably expect toexpand their range under present circumstances, confined as they are tothe one small patch of land that exists on their world, but they dreamof becoming amphibious.""Of becoming what ?""Amphibious. They plan to develop gills in addition to lungs. Theydream of being able to spend substantial periods of time underwater; offinding shallow regions and building structures on the ocean bottom. Myinformant was quite glowing about it but she admitted that this had beena goal of the Alphans for some centuries now and that little, if any,progress has been made."Trevize said, "That's two fields in which they might be more advancedthan we are; weather control and biotechnology. I wonder what theirtechniques are.""We'd have to find specialists," said Bliss, "and they might not bewilling to talk about it."Trevize said, "It's not our primary concern here,but it would clearly pay the Foundation to attempt to learn from thisminiature world."Pelorat said, "We manage to control the weather fairly well onTerminus, as it is.""Control is good on many worlds," said Trevize, "but always it's amatter of the world as a whole. Here the Alphans control the weatherof a small portion of the world and they must have techniques we don'thave. Anything else, Bliss?""Social invitations. These appear to be a holiday-making people,in whatever time they can take from farming and fishing. Afterdinner, tonight there'll be a music festival. I told you aboutthat already. Tomorrow, during the day, there will be a beachfestival. Apparently, all around the rim of the island there will bea congregation of everyone who can get away from the fields in orderthat they might enjoy the water and celebrate the sun, since it will beraining the next day. In the morning, the fishing fleet will come back,beating the rain, and by evening there will be a food festival, samplingthe catch."Pelorat groaned. "The meals are ample enough as it is. What would afood festival be like?""I gather that it will feature not quantity, but variety. In anycase, all four of us are invited to participate in all the festivals,especially the music festival tonight.""On the antique instruments?" asked Trevize.
"That's right.""What makes them antique, by the way? Primitive computers?""No, no. That's the point. It isn't electronic music at all, butmechanical. They described it to me. They scrape strings, blow in tubes,and bang on surfaces.""I hope you're making that up," said Trevize, appalled.
"No, I'm not. And I understand that your Hiroko will be blowing onone of the tubes I forget its name and you ought to be ableto endure that.""As for myself," said Pelorat, "I would love to go. I know very littleabout primitive music and I would like to hear it.""She is not `my Hiroko,'" said Trevize coldly. "But are the instrumentsof the type once used on Earth, do you suppose?""So I gathered," said Bliss. "At least the Alphan women said theywere designed long before their ancestors came here.""In that case," said Trevize, "it may be worth listening to allthat scraping, tootling, and banging, for whatever information it mightconceivably yield concerning Earth."81Oddly enough, it was Fallom who was most excited atthe prospect of a musical evening. She and Bliss had bathed in thesmall outhouse behind their quarters. It had a bath with running water,hot and cold (or, rather, warm and cool), a washbowl, and a commode. Itwas totally clean and usable and, in the late afternoon sun, it was evenwell lit and cheerful.
As always, Fallom was fascinated with Bliss's breasts and Bliss wasreduced to saying (now that Fallom understood Galactic) that on herworld that was the way people were. To which Fallom said, inevitably,"Why?" and Bliss, after some thought, deciding there was no sensibleway of answering, returned the universal reply, "Because!"When they were done, Bliss helped Fallom put on the undergarmentsupplied them by the Alphans and worked out the system whereby theskirt went on over it. Leaving Fallom unclothed from the waist up seemedreasonable enough. She herself, while making use of Alphan garments belowthe waist (rather tight about the hips), put on her own blouse. It seemedsilly to be too inhibited to expose breasts in a society where all womendid, especially since her own were not large and were as shapely as anyshe had seen but there it was.
The two men took their turn at the outhouse next, Trevize mutteringthe usual male complaint concerning the time the women had taken.
Bliss turned Fallom about to make sure the skirt would hold in placeover her boyish hips and buttocks. She said, "It's a very pretty skirt,Fallom. Do you like it?"Fallom stared at it in a mirror and said, "Yes, I do. Won't I be coldwith nothing on, though?" and she ran her hands down her bare chest.
"I don't think so, Fallom. It's quite warm on this world."" You have something on.""Yes, I do. That's how it is on my world. Now, Fallom, we're going tobe with a great many Alphans during dinner and afterward. Do you thinkyou can bear that?"Fallom looked distressed, and Bliss went on, "I will sit on your rightside and I will hold you. Pel will sit on the other side, and Trevizewill sit across the table from you. We won't let anyone talk to you,and you won't have to talk to anyone.""I'll try, Bliss," Fallom piped in her highest tones.
"Then afterward," said Bliss, "some Alphans will make music for usin their own special way. Do you know what music is?" She hummed in thebest imitation of electronic harmony that she could.
Fallom's face lit up. "You mean   " The last word was inher own language, and she burst into song.
Bliss's eyes widened. It was a beautiful tune, even though it was wild,and rich in trills. "That's right. Music," she said.
Fallom said excitedly, "Jemby made" she hesitated, then decidedto use the Galactic word "music all the time. It made music on a  " Again a word in her own language.
Bliss repeated the word doubtfully, "On a feeful?"Fallom laughed. "Not feeful,   "With both words juxtaposed like that, Bliss could hear the difference,but she despaired of reproducing the second. She said, "What does itlook like?"Fallom's as yet limited vocabulary in Galactic did not suffice for anaccurate description, and her gestures did not produce any shape clearlyin Bliss's mind.
"He showed me how to use the   " Fallom said proudly. "Iused my fingers just the way Jemby did, but it said that soon I wouldn'thave to.""That's wonderful, dear," said Bliss. "After dinner, we'll see ifthe Alphans are as good as your Jemby was."Fallom's eyes sparkled and pleasant thoughts of what was to followcarried her through a lavish dinner despite the crowds and laughterand noise all about her. Only once, when a dish was accidentally upset,setting off shrieks of excitement fairly close to them, did Fallom lookfrightened, and Bliss promptly held her close in a warm and protectivehug.
"I wonder if we can arrange to eat by ourselves," she muttered toPelorat. "Otherwise, we'll have to get off this world. It's bad enougheating all this Isolate animal protein, but I must be ableto do it in peace.""It's only high spirits," said Pelorat, who would have endured anythingwithin reason that he felt came under the heading of primitive behaviorand beliefs.
 And then the dinner was over, and the announcement came thatthe music festival would soon begin.
82The hall in which the music festival was to be heldwas about as large as the dining room, and there were folding seats(rather uncomfortable, Trevize found out) for about a hundred fiftypeople. As honored guests, the visitors were led to the front row,and various Alphans commented politely and favorably on their clothes.
Both men were bare above the waist and Trevize tightened his abdominalmuscles whenever he thought of it and stared down, on occasion, withcomplacent self-admiration at his dark-haired chest. Pelorat, in hisardent observation of everything about him, was indifferent to his ownappearance. Bliss's blouse drew covert stares of puzzlement but nothingwas said concerning it.
Trevize noted that the hall was only about half-full and that thelarge majority of the audience were women, since, presumably, so manymen were out to sea.
Pelorat nudged Trevize and whispered, "They have electricity."Trevize looked at the vertical tubes on the walls, and at others onthe ceiling. They were softly luminous.
"Fluorescence," he said. "Quite primitive.""Yes, but they do the job, and we've got those things in our roomsand in the outhouse. I thought they were just decorative. If we can findout how to work them, we won't have to stay in the dark."Bliss said irritably, "They might have told us."Pelorat said, "They thought we'd know; that anyone would know."Four women now emerged from behind screens and seated themselves ina group in the space at the front. Each held an instrument of varnishedwood of a similar shape, but one that was not easily describable. Theinstruments were chiefly different in size. One was quite small, twosomewhat larger, and the fourth considerably larger. Each woman alsoheld a long rod in the other hand.
The audience whistled softly as they came in, in response to whichthe four women bowed. Each had a strip of gauze bound fairly tightlyacross the breasts as though to keep them from interfering with theinstrument.
Trevize, interpreting the whistles as signs of approval, or of pleasedanticipation, felt it only polite to add his own. At that, Fallom added atrill that was far more than a whistle and that was beginning to attractattention when pressure from Bliss's hand stopped her.
Three of the women, without preparation, put their instruments undertheir chins, while the largest of the instruments remained between thelegs of the fourth woman and rested on the floor. The long rod in theright hand of each was sawed across the strings stretching nearly thelength of the instrument, while the fingers of the left hand shiftedrapidly along the upper ends of those strings.
This, thought Trevize, was the "scraping" he had expected, butit didn't sound like scraping at all. There was a soft and melodioussuccession of notes; each instrument doing something of its own and thewhole fusing pleasantly.
It lacked the infinite complexity of electronic music ("real music," asTrevize could not help but think of it) and there was a distinct samenessto it. Still, as time passed, and his ear grew accustomed to this oddsystem of sound, he began to pick out subtleties. It was wearisome tohave to do so, and he thought, longingly, of the clamor and mathematicalprecision and purity of the real thing, but it occurred to him that ifhe listened to the music of these simple wooden devices long enough hemight well grow to like it.
It was not till the concert was some forty-five minutes old that Hirokostepped out. She noticed Trevize in the front row at once and smiled athim. He joined the audience in the soft whistle of approval with a wholeheart. She looked beautiful in a long and most elaborate skirt, a largeflower in her hair, and nothing at all over her breasts since (apparently)there was no danger of their interference with the instrument.
Her instrument proved to be a dark wooden tube about two thirds of ameter long and nearly two centimeters thick. She lifted the instrumentto her lips and blew across an opening near one end, producing a thin,sweet note that wavered in pitch as her fingers manipulated metal objectsalong the length of the tube.
At the first sound, Fallom clutched at Bliss's arm and said, "Bliss,that's a   " and the word sounded like "feeful" to Bliss.
Bliss shook her head firmly at Fallom, who said, in a lower voice,"But it is!"Others were looking in Fallom's direction. Bliss put her hand firmlyover Fallom's mouth, and leaned down to mutter an almost subliminallyforceful "Quiet!" into her ear.
Fallom listened to Hiroko's playing quietly thereafter, but herfingers moved spasmodically, as though they were operating the objectsalong the length of the instrument.
The final player in the concert was an elderly man who had aninstrument with fluted sides suspended over his shoulders. He pulled itin and out while one hand flashed across a succession of white and darkobjects at one end, pressing them down in groups.
Trevize found this sound particularly wearing, rather barbaric,and unpleasantly like the memory of the barking of the dogs onAurora not that the sound was like barking, but the emotions it gaverise to were similar. Bliss looked as though she would like to place herhands over her ears, and Pelorat had a frown on his face. Only Fallomseemed to enjoy it, for she was tapping her foot lightly, and Trevize,when he noticed that, realized, to his own surprise, that there was abeat to the music that matched Fallom's footfall.
It came to an end at last and there was a perfect storm of whistling,with Fallom's trill clearly heard above it all.
Then the audience broke up into small conversational groups and becameas loud and raucous as Alphans seemed to be on all public occasions. Thevarious individuals who had played in the concert stood about in front ofthe room and spoke to those people who came up to congratulate them.
Fallom evaded Bliss's grasp and ran up to Hiroko.
"Hiroko," she cried out, gaspingly. "Let me see the   ""The what, dear one?" said Hiroko.
"The thing you made the music with.""Oh." Hiroko laughed. "That's a flute, little one.""May I see it?""Well." Hiroko opened a case and took out the instrument. It was inthree parts, but she put it together quickly, held it toward Fallom withthe mouthpiece near her lips, and said, "There, blow thou thy breathacross this.""I know. I know," said Fallom eagerly, and reached for the flute.
Automatically, Hiroko snatched it away and held it high. "Blow, child,but touch not."Fallom seemed disappointed. "May I just look at it, then? I won'ttouch it.""Certainly, dear one."She held out the flute again and Fallom stared at it earnestly.
And then, the fluorescent lighting in the room dimmed very slightly,and the sound of a flute's note, a little uncertain and wavering, madeitself heard.
Hiroko, in surprise, nearly dropped the flute, and Fallom cried out,"I did it. I did it. Jemby said someday I could do it."Hiroko said, "Was it thou that made the sound?""Yes, I did. I did.""But how didst thou do so, child?"Bliss said, red with embarrassment, "I'm sorry, Hiroko. I'll takeher away.""No," said Hiroko. "I wish her to do it again."A few of the nearest Alphans had gathered to watch. Fallom furrowedher brow as though trying hard. The fluorescents dimmed rather more thanbefore, and again there was the note of the flute, this time pure andsteady. Then it became erratic as the metal objects along the length ofthe flute moved of their own accord.
"It's a little different from the   " Fallom said, alittle breathlessly, as though the breath that had been activating theflute had been her own instead of power-driven air.
Pelorat said to Trevize, "She must be getting the energy from theelectric current that feeds the fluorescents.""Try again," said Hiroko in a choked voice.
Fallom closed her eyes. The note was softer now and under firmercontrol. The flute played by itself, maneuvered by no fingers, but movedby distant energy, transduced through the still immature lobes of Fallom'sbrain. The notes which began as almost random settled into a musicalsuccession and now everyone in the hall had gathered around Hiroko andFallom, as Hiroko held the flute gently with thumb and forefinger ateither end, and Fallom, eyes closed, directed the current of air andthe movement of the keys.
"It's the piece I played," whispered Hiroko.
"I remember it," said Fallom, nodding her head slightly, trying notto break her concentration.
"Thou didst not miss a note," said Hiroko, when it was done.
"But it's not right, Hiroko. You didn't do it right."Bliss said, "Fallom! That's not polite. You mustn't ""Please," said Hiroko peremptorily, "do not interfere. Why is it notright, child?""Because I would play it differently.""Show me, then."Again the flute played, but in more complicated fashion, for the forcesthat pushed the keys did so more quickly, in more rapid succession andin more elaborate combinations than before. The music was more complex,and infinitely more emotional and moving. Hiroko stood rigid and therewas not a sound to be heard anywhere in the room.
Even after Fallom had finished playing, there was not a sound untilHiroko drew a deep breath and said, "Little one, hast thou ever playedthat before?""No," said Fallom, "before this I could only use my fingers, andI can't do my fingers like that." Then, simply and with no trace ofvaunting, "No one can.""Canst thou play anything else?""I can make something up.""Dost thou mean improvise?"Fallom frowned at the word and looked toward Bliss. Bliss nodded andFallom said, "Yes.""Please do so, then," said Hiroko.
Fallom paused and thought for a minute or two, then began slowly,in a very simple succession of notes, the whole being rather dreamy. Thefluorescent lights dimmed and brightened as the amount of power exertedintensified and faded. No one seemed to notice, for it seemed to be theeffect of the music rather than the cause, as though a ghostly electricalspirit were obeying the dictates of the sound waves.
The combination of notes then repeated itself a bit more loudly, thena bit more complexly, then in variations that, without ever losing theclearly heard basic combination, became more stirring and more excitinguntil it was almost impossible to breathe. And finally, it descendedmuch more rapidly than it had ascended and did so with the effect ofa swooping dive that brought the listeners to ground level even whilethey still retained the feeling that they were high in the air.
There followed sheer pandemonium that split the air, and even Trevize,who was used to a totally different kind of music, thought sadly,"And now I'll never hear that again."When a most reluctant quiet had returned, Hiroko held out herflute. "Here, Fallom, this is thine!"Fallom reached for it eagerly, but Bliss caught hold of the child'soutstretched arm and said, "We can't take it, Hiroko. It's a valuableinstrument.""I have another, Bliss. Not quite as good, but that is how it shouldbe. This instrument belongeth to the person who playeth it best. Neverhave I heard such music and it would be wrong for me to own an instrumentI cannot use to full potential. Would that I knew how the instrumentcould be made to play without being touched."Fallom took the flute and, with an expression of deep content, heldit tightly to her chest.
83Each of the two rooms of their quarters were lit by onefluorescent light. The outhouse had a third. The lights were dim, and wereuncomfortable to read by, but at least the rooms were no longer dark.
Yet they now lingered outside. The sky was full of stars, somethingthat was always fascinating to a native of Terminus, where the night skywas all but starless and in which only the faint foreshortened cloud ofthe Galaxy was prominent.
Hiroko had accompanied them back to their chambers for fear they wouldget lost in the dark, or that they would stumble. All the way back, sheheld Fallom's hand, and then, after lighting the fluorescents for them,remained outside with them, still clutching at the youngster.
Bliss tried again, for it was clear to her that Hiroko was in a stateof a difficult conflict of emotions. "Really, Hiroko, we cannot takeyour flute.""No, Fallom must have it." But she seemed on edge just the same.
Trevize continued to look at the sky. The night was truly dark,a darkness that was scarcely affected by the trickle of light fromtheir own chambers; and much less so by the tiny sparks of other housesfarther off.
He said, "Hiroko, do you see that star that is so bright? What isit called?"Hiroko looked up casually and said, with no great appearance ofinterest, "That's the Companion.""Why is it called that?""It circleth our sun every eighty Standard Years. It is an eveningstar at this time of year. Thou canst see it in daytime, too, when itlieth above the horizon."Good, thought Trevize. She's not totally ignorant of astronomy. Hesaid, "Do you know that Alpha has another companion, a very small, dimone that's much much farther away than that bright star. You can't seeit without a telescope." (He hadn't seen it himself, hadn't botheredto search for it, but the ship's computer had the information in itsmemory banks.)She said indifferently, "We were told that in school.""But now what about that one? You see those six stars in a zigzagline?"Hiroko said, "That is Cassiopeia.""Really?" said Trevize, startled. "Which star?""All of them. The whole zigzag. It is Cassiopeia.""Why is it called that?""I lack the knowledge. I know nothing of astronomy, respectedTrevize.""Do you see the lowermost star in the zigzag, the one that's brighterthan the other stars? What is that?""It is a star. I know not its name.""But except for the two companion stars, it's the closest of all thestars to Alpha. It is only a parsec away."Hiroko said, "Sayest thou so? I know that not.""Might it not be the star about which Earth revolves?"Hiroko looked at the star with a faint flash of interest. "I knownot. I have never heard any person say so.""Don't you think it might be?""How can I say? None knoweth where Earth might be. I I mustleave thee, now. I will be taking my shift in the fields tomorrowmorning before the beach festival. I'll see you all there, right afterlunch. Yes? Yes?""Certainly, Hiroko."She left suddenly, half-running in the dark. Trevize looked after her,then followed the others into the dimly lit cottage.
He said, "Can you tell whether she was lying about Earth, Bliss?"Bliss shook her head. "I don't think she was. She is under enormoustension, something I was not aware of until after the concert. It existedbefore you asked her about the stars.""Because she gave away her flute, then?""Perhaps. I can't tell." She turned to Fallom. "Now, Fallom, I wantyou to go into your room. When you're ready for bed, go to the outhouse,use the potty, then wash your hands, your face, and your teeth.""I would like to play the flute, Bliss.""Just for a little while, and very quietly. Do you understand,Fallom? And you must stop when I tell you to.""Yes, Bliss."The three were now alone; Bliss in the one chair and the men sittingeach on his cot.
Bliss said, "Is there any point in staying on this planet anylonger?"Trevize shrugged. "We never did get to discuss Earth in connectionwith the ancient instruments, and we might find something there. Itmight also pay to wait for the fishing fleet to return. The men mightknow something the stay-at-homes don't."" Very unlikely, I think," said Bliss. "Are you sure it'snot Hiroko's dark eyes that hold you?"Trevize said impatiently, "I don't understand, Bliss. What have youto do with what I choose to do? Why do you seem to arrogate to yourselfthe right of sitting in moral judgment on me?""I'm not concerned with your morals. The matter affects ourexpedition. You want to find Earth so that you can finally decidewhether you are right in choosing Galaxia over Isolate worlds. I wantyou to so decide. You say you need to visit Earth to make the decisionand you seem to be convinced that Earth revolves about that bright starin the sky. Let us go there, then. I admit it would be useful to havesome information about it before we go, but it is clear to me that theinformation is not forthcoming here. I do not wish to remain simplybecause you enjoy Hiroko.""Perhaps we'll leave," said Trevize. "Let me think about it, andHiroko will play no part in my decision, I assure you."Pelorat said, "I feel we ought to move on to Earth, if only to seewhether it is radioactive or not. I see no point in waiting longer.""Are you sure it's not Bliss's dark eyes that drive you?" saidTrevize, a bit spitefully. Then, almost at once, "No, I take that back,Janov. I was just being childish. Still this is a charming world,quite apart from Hiroko, and I must say that under other circumstances,I would be tempted to remain indefinitely. Don't you think, Bliss,that Alpha destroys your theory about Isolates?""In what way?" asked Bliss.
"You've been maintaining that every truly isolated world turnsdangerous and hostile.""Even Comporellon," said Bliss evenly, "which is rather out of themain current of Galactic activity for all that it is, in theory, anAssociated Power of the Foundation Federation.""But not Alpha. This world is totally isolated, butcan you complain of their friendliness and hospitality? They feed us,clothe us, shelter us, put on festivals in our honor, urge us to stayon. What fault is there to find with them?""None, apparently. Hiroko even gives you her body."Trevize said angrily, "Bliss, what bothers you about that? She didn'tgive me her body. We gave each other our bodies. It was entirely mutual,entirely pleasurable. Nor can you say that you hesitate to give yourbody as it suits you.""Please, Bliss," said Pelorat. "Golan is entirely right. There is noreason to object to his private pleasures.""As long as they don't affect us," said Bliss obdurately.
"They do not affect us," said Trevize. "We will leave, I assure you. Adelay to search further for information will not be long.""Yet I don't trust Isolates," said Bliss, "even when they comebearing gifts."Trevize flung up his arms. "Reach a conclusion, then twist the evidenceto fit. How like a ""Don't say it," said Bliss dangerously. "I am not a woman. I amGaia. It is Gaia, not I, who is uneasy.""There is no reason to " And at that point there was a scratchingat the door.
Trevize froze. "What's that?" he said, in a low voice.
Bliss shrugged lightly. "Open the door and see. You tell us this isa kindly world that offers no danger."Nevertheless, Trevize hesitated, until a soft voice from the otherside of the door called out softly, "Please. It is I!"It was Hiroko's voice. Trevize threw the door open.
Hiroko entered quickly. Her cheeks were wet.
"Close the door," she gasped.
"What is it?" asked Bliss.
Hiroko clutched at Trevize. "I could not stay away. I tried, but Iendured it not. Go thou, and all of you. Take the youngster with youquickly. Take the ship away      from Alpha while it isyet dark.""But why?" asked Trevize.
"Because else wilt thou die; and all of you."84The three Outworlders stared frozenly at Hiroko fora long moment. Then Trevize said, "Are you saying your people willkill us?"Hiroko said, as the tears rolled down her cheeks, "Thou art already onthe road to death, respected Trevize. And the others with you. Longago, those of learning devised a virus, harmless to us, but deadlyto Outworlders. We have been made immune." She shook Trevize's arm indistraction. "Thou art infected.""How?""When we had our pleasure. It is one way."Trevize said, "But I feel entirely well.""The virus is as yet inactive. It will be made active when the fishingfleet returns. By our laws, all must decide on such a thing eventhe men. All will surely decide it must be done, and we keep you heretill that time, two mornings hence. Leave now while it is yet dark andnone suspects."Bliss said sharply, "Why do your people do this?""For our safety. We are few and have much. We do not wish Outworldersto intrude. If one cometh and then reporteth our lot, others will come,and so when, once in a long while, a ship arriveth, we must make certainit leaveth not.""But then," said Trevize, "why do you warn us away?""Ask not the reason. Nay, but I will tell you, since I hear itagain. Listen "From the next room, they could hear Fallom playing softly andinfinitely sweetly.
Hiroko said, "I cannot bear the destruction of that music, for theyoung one will also die."Trevize said sternly, "Is that why you gave the flute toFallom? Because you knew you would have it once again when she wasdead?"Hiroko looked horrified. "Nay, that was not in my mind. And when itcame to mind at length, I knew it must not be done. Leave with the child,and with her, take the flute that I may never see it more. Thou wilt besafe back in space and, left inactive, the virus now in thy body willdie after a time. In return, I ask that none of you ever speak of thisworld, that none else may know of it.""We will not speak of it," said Trevize.
Hiroko looked up. In a lower voice, she said, "May I not kiss theeonce ere thou leavest?"Trevize said, "No. I have been infected once and surely that isenough." And then, a little less roughly, he added, "Don't cry. Peoplewill ask why you are crying and you'll be unable to reply. I'llforgive what you did to me in view of your present effort to save us."Hiroko straightened, carefully wiped her cheeks with the back ofher hands, took a deep breath, and said, "I thank thee for that," andleft quickly.
Trevize said, "We will put out the light, and we will wait awhile,and then we will leave. Bliss, tell Fallom to stop playing herinstrument. Remember to take the flute, of course. Then we willmake our way to the ship, if we can find it in the dark.""I will find it," said Bliss. "Clothing of mine is on board and,however dimly, that, too, is Gaia. Gaia will have no trouble findingGaia." And she vanished into her room to collect Fallom.
Pelorat said, "Do you suppose that they've managed to damage our shipin order to keep us on the planet?""They lack the technology to do it," said Trevize grimly. When Blissemerged, holding Fallom by the hand, Trevize put out the lights.
They sat quietly in the dark for what seemed half the night, andmight have been half an hour. Then Trevize slowly and silently openedthe door. The sky seemed a bit more cloudy, but stars shone. High in thesky now was Cassiopeia, with what might be Earth's sun burning brightlyat its lower tip. The air was still and there was no sound.
Carefully, Trevize stepped out, motioning the others to follow. Oneof his hands dropped, almost automatically, to the butt of his neuronicwhip. He was sure he would not have to use it, but Bliss took the lead, holding Pelorat's hand, who heldTrevize's. Bliss's other hand held Fallom, and Fallom's other hand heldthe flute. Feeling gently with her feet in the nearly total darkness,Bliss guided the others toward where she felt, very weakly, the Gaia-nessof her clothing on board the Far Star .
第十八章 音乐节
　　78
午餐地点是他们进早餐的同一间餐厅。这回里面坐满阿尔发人，崔维兹与裴洛拉特夹在人群中，受到热烈的欢迎。宝绮思与菲龙并未加入，她们在旁边一间较隐密的小房间用餐。
午餐包括好几种不同的鱼类，此外汤里有许多肉片，看来很像是小山羊肉。餐桌上有一条条待切的面包，旁边摆着奶油与果酱，随后又上了一大盘什么都有的沙拉。奇怪的是没有任何甜点，不过一壶壶的果汁彷佛源源不绝。两位基地人由于早餐吃得太好，现在不得不有所节制，但其他人似乎都在尽情享用。
“他们怎样避免发胖呢？”裴洛拉特低声嘀咕。
崔维兹耸了耸肩。“大概是劳动量很大吧。”
这个社会显然不太注着用餐礼仪，各种吵闹的声音没有停过，包括叫嚷声、欢笑声、以及厚实（而且显然摔不破）的杯子砸到桌面的声音。女人的声音和男人一样嘈杂从邡，只不过音调高出许多。
裴洛拉特一副受不了的样子，但崔维兹现在（至少暂时）完全忘却他对广子提过的那种不舒服，感到的只是轻松和愉快。
他说：“其实，这也有可爱的一面。这些人显然很会享受生活，几乎没什么烦恼。气候由他们自己控制，粮食丰饶得难以想像。这是他们的黄金时代，而且必定会一直继续下去。”
他得大声喊叫才能把话说清楚，裴洛拉特也以大吼回答道：“可是这么吵！”
“他们习惯了。”
“在这么吵闹的场合，我不懂他们如何能沟通。”
当然，两位基地人什么也听不出来。阿尔发语的奇怪发音、古老文法以及字词的特殊顺序，以巨大的音量不断轰来，让他们根本摸不着头脑。对这两位基地人而言，这简直像置身于受惊的动物园中。
直到午餐过后，他们才在一栋小型建筑中与宝绮思会合。这里是分配给他们的临时住所，崔维兹发现跟广子的家几乎没什么不同。菲龙待在另一个房间，据宝绮思说，有机会独处让菲龙的情绪大为放松，她正准备小睡一会儿。
裴洛拉特望着充当大门的墙洞，不安地说：“这里简直没有隐私。我们怎能放心地说话？”
“我向你保证，”崔维兹说：“只要用帆布屏障把门遮起来，就不会有人打扰我们。由于社会习俗的力量，那帆布像铜墙铁壁一样。”
裴洛拉特又朝敞开的天窗瞥了一眼。“我们的谈话会被人偷听。”
“我们不必大吼大叫。阿尔发人不会做隔墙有耳的事，早餐的时候，他们虽然站在餐厅窗外，却仍保持礼貌的距离。”
宝绮思微笑着说：“你和可亲的小便子在一起没多久，就学到这么多的阿尔发礼俗；他们对于隐私的尊着，你现在也信心十足。究竟发生了什么事？”
崔维兹说：“如果你发觉我的心灵卷须获得改善，又猜得出原因的话，我只能拜托你离我的心灵远一点。”
“你明明知道，除非是生死关头，否则在任何情况下，盖娅都不会碰触你的心灵，而且你也明白为什么。不过话说回来，我的精神力量并未失灵，我能感测到一公里外发生的事。这是不是你从事太空旅行的老毛病，我的色情狂朋友？”
“色情狂？得了吧，宝绮思。整个旅途中才发生两次，两次而已！”
“我们造访过的世界，只有两个有活色生香的女人。二分之二的机会，而且都是在几小时后就发生的。”
“你很清楚在康普隆我是身不由己。”
“有道理，我还记得她的模样。”宝绮思纵声大笑了一阵子，又说：“可是我不信广子有多大能耐，能够让你束手就擒，或是将不可抗拒的意志，强行加在你瑟缩的身子上。”
“当然不是那样，我完全心甘情愿。不过，那的确是她的主意。”
裴洛拉特带着一丝羡慕的口吻说：“这种事总是发生在你身上吗，葛兰？”
“当然必定如此，裴。”宝绮思说：“女性都会不由自主被他吸引。”
“我希望真是如此，”崔维兹说：“但事实不然。我很庆幸事实并非如此——我这辈子实在还想做些别的事。话又说回来，这回我倒真是令她无法抗拒。毕竟，在我们来到之前，广子从来没见过其他世界的人，阿尔发上现存的居民显然全都未曾见过。从她说溜了嘴的一些事，以及随口的几句话，我推出一个结论，那就是她有个令她相当兴奋的期待，认为我也许在生理结构或技巧方面，跟其他的阿尔发人有所不同。可怜的小东西，恐怕她失望了。”
“哦？”宝绮思说：“那么你呢？”
“我不会，”崔维兹说：“我到过不少世界，有过许多实际经验。我发现不论在什么地方，人是人、性是性，两者不能混为一谈。如果真有什么显着的差异，通常也是微不足道，而且不怎么愉快。算算我这辈子也闻过不少香水！我还记得有个年轻女子，她怎么样也无法投入，除非把夹杂着死命尖叫的音乐开得很大声。而她一放那种音乐，我却提不起劲来了。我向你保证——只要像往常一样，我就很满意了。”
“提到音乐，”宝绮思说：“我们受邀晚餐后出席一场音乐庆典。这显然是件很正式的事，专门为我们而举行的。我猜，阿尔发人对他们的音乐非常自豪。”
崔维兹做个鬼脸。“不论他们如何引以为傲，也不会让他们的音乐更悦耳。”
“听我说完，”宝绮思说：“我猜他们自豪的原因，是他们善于演奏很古老的乐器——非常古老。藉着这些乐器，我们或许能获得些地球的资料。”
崔维兹扬起眉毛。“很有意思的想法。这倒提醒了我，你们两位也许已经获得一些线索。詹诺夫，你见到广子提到的那个单姓李了吗？”
“我的确见到了，”裴洛拉特说：“我跟他在一起三个钟头，广子讲得并不夸张，几乎都是他一个人唱独脚戏。我要来吃午餐的时候，他竟然抓住我，不肯让我离开，直到我答应他会尽快回去，听他说更多的故事，他才把我给放了。”
“他有没有提到任何着要的事？”
“嗯，他也——跟其他人一样——坚持地球已经布满致命的放射性。他说阿尔发人的祖先是最后一批离开的，他们如果再不逃走就没命了。而且，葛兰，他说得如此坚决，叫我不得不相信他。我现在确信地球已经死了，我们这趟寻找终归是一场空。”
79
崔维兹靠向椅背，瞪着坐在狭窄便床上的裴洛拉特。宝绮思原来坐在裴洛拉特身旁，现在她站起来，轮流望着其他两人。
最后，崔维兹终于开口：“我们的寻找是不是一场空，詹诺夫，让我来决定吧。告诉我那个唠叨的老头跟你讲了些什么——当然，要长话短说。”
裴洛拉特说：“单姓李说话的时候，我一直在旁边做笔记，这样使我看来更像一名学者，但我现在不必参考那些笔记。他说话的方式相当意识流，每说到一件事都缓螵想到另一件。不过，当然啦，我一辈子都在搜集地球的相关资料，设法将它们有系统地组织起来，所以我练就了一项本能，能将冗长而杂乱无章的谈话内容浓缩成……”
崔维兹轻声道：“浓缩成同样冗长而杂乱无章的话？说着点就好，亲爱的詹诺夫。”
裴洛拉特不自在地清了清喉咙。“当然没错，老弟。我会试着将他的话整理成依照时间顺序的连贯故事。地球是人类最早的故乡，也是数百万种动植物的发源地，这种情形持续了无数岁月，直到超空间旅行发明为止。后来许多外世界陆续建立起来，它们脱离了地球，发展出自己的文化，进而鄙视并压迫那个源头母星。
“数个世纪后，地球终于设法争回自由，不过单姓李并未解释地球究竟是如何做到的。即使他给我机会插嘴，我也不敢发问，因为那只会让他岔到别的话题去，而且他根本没给我发问的机会。他的确提到一个文化英雄，名字叫作伊利亚•贝莱，可是历史纪录有个很普遍的倾向，就是将几世代的成就归诸某一人物身上，因此不值得去……”
宝绮思说：“没错，亲爱的裴，这点我们了解。”
裴洛拉特再度打住，思索了一下。“真是的，我很抱歉。后来地球掀起第二波星际殖民潮，以崭新的方式建立许多新世界。新的殖民者比外世界人更有活力，超越了他们、击败了他们，而且繁衍绵延不绝，终于创建了银河帝国。在银河殖民者和外世界人交战期间——不对，不是交战，因为他用的词汇是‘冲突’，而且用得非常谨慎——地球变得具有放射性了。”
崔维兹显然是失去耐性了，他说：“实在荒谬绝伦，詹诺夫。一个世界怎么可能‘变得’具有放射性？每个世界在形成的那一刻，多多少少都会带有微量放射性，而那种放射性会渐渐衰变。地球不可能突然‘变得’具有放射性。”
裴洛拉特耸了耸肩。“我只是将他说的话转述给你，他只是将他听到的转述给我，告诉他的人又是听别人转述的——故事就这样一传再传。这是个民间历史，一代代口耳相传，谁知道每次转述被扭曲了多少。”
“我了解这点，可是难道没有任何书籍、文件、古代历史等等，在早期就将这个故事褂讪下来，而能提供我们比这传说更正确的记载？”
“其实，我问过他这个问题，答案是否定的。他含混地提到，记载古代历史的书籍不是没有，但很早以前就散轶了。而他告诉我们的，正是那些书上的记载。”
“对，扭曲得很厉害的记载。同样的事再度发生，我们造访的每个世界，地球的资料总是不翼而飞——嗯，他说地球是怎样变得具有放射性的？”
“他未做任何解释，顶多只提到外世界人要负责。不过我猜地球人把外世界人视为邪恶的化身，将所有的不幸都归咎于他们身上。至于放射性……”
此时，一个清脆的声音掩盖了他的话。“宝绮思，我是外世界人吗？”
菲龙正站在两房之间的窄门口，她的头发乱成一团，身上穿的睡衣（根据宝绮思较丰满的体型裁制）从肩头一侧垂下，露出一个没有发育的乳房。
宝绮思说：“我们担心外面有人偷听，却忘了里面同样隔墙有耳——好吧，菲龙，为何那么说？”她站起来，朝那孩子走过去。
菲龙说：“我没有他们身上的东西，”她指了指两位男士，“也没有你身上的东西，宝绮思。我和你们不同，因为我是外世界人吗？”
“你是外世界人，菲龙，”宝绮思以安抚的口吻说：“不过有一点差别没什么关系，回房睡觉去吧。”
菲龙变得非常乖顺，就像每次宝绮思以意志驱使她时一样。她转过身去，又问道：“我是邪恶的化身吗？什么是邪恶的化身？”
宝绮思背对着其他两人说：“等我一下，我马上回来。”
五分钟不到她就回来了，摇着头说：“她睡着了，会睡到我叫醒她为止。我想我早就该那么做了，可是对心灵的任何调整，都一定要有必要的理由。”
她又为自己辩护道：“我不能让她一直想着她的生殖器和我们的有何不同。”
裴洛拉特说：“总有一天她会知道自己是个雌雄同体。”
“总有一天，”宝绮思说：“但不是现在。继续刚才的故事吧，裴。”
“对，”崔维兹说：“免得待会儿又被什么打断了。”
“嗯，于是地球变得具有放射性，或者至少地壳如此。那时地球人口众多，全都集中在许多大型城市里，而城市大部分位于地底——”
“慢着，”崔维兹插嘴道：“那是不可能的，一定是某颗行星的黄金时代经地方主义渲染的结果，内容不过是根据川陀的黄金时代变杂邙成。在川陀的全盛时期，它是一个泛银河政体的京畿所在地。”
裴洛拉特顿了一下，然后说：“说实在的，葛兰，你真不该班门弄斧。我们神话学家非常了解，神话传说中包含了许多抄袭剽窃、道德教训、自然周期，以及上百种其他的扭曲因素。我们尽力将这些外加成分删除，以得到可能的核心真相。事实上，同样的方法一定也适用于最严肃的历史研究，因为没有人能写出清晰、透明的历史真相——即使真有所谓的真相。现在我告诉你们的，差不多就是转述单姓李告诉我的，不过我想自己难免加油添醋了一番，虽然我已尽量避免。”
“好啦，好啦。”崔维兹说：“继续吧，詹诺夫，我无意冒犯你。”
“我没有生气——姑且假设那些大城市真正存在，随着放射性逐渐增强，所有城市都开始解体，范围越缩越小，最后只剩下残存的极少数人，躲在比较没有放射性的地方，过着岌岌可危的日子。他们为了保持少量人口，除了严格控制生育之外，还对六十岁以上的人施以安乐死。”
“太可怕了。”宝绮思愤慨地说。
“这点毋庸置疑，”裴洛拉特说：“不过据单姓李说，他们的确这么做。那也许是真正的史实，因为它当然不是对地球人的夸赞，不太可能有人捏造这种自取其辱的谎言。地球人过去遭到外世界人的鄙视与压迫，后来又受到帝国的鄙视与压迫；不过这种说法也有可能是由于自怜而夸大其词。自怜是种极具诱惑力的情绪，有那么一个例子……”
“没错，没错，裴洛拉特，改天再谈那个例子，请继续讲地球的故事。”
“我非常抱歉——后来帝国突然大发慈悲，答应运一批无放射性的泥土到地球来，并将那些受污染的泥土运走。不用说，那是件浩大的工程，帝国很快就失去耐性。尤其这个时期，如果我猜得没错，刚好是肯达五世下台前后，此后帝国自顾不暇，便无心照顾地球了。
“放射性继续增强，地球的人口继续锐减。最后，帝国又发了一次慈悲，愿意将残存的地球人迁往另一个属于他们的新世界——简言之，就是这个世界。
“在此之前，似乎有个探险队曾在这个海洋播育生命，因此，迁移地球人的计划付诸实施之际，阿尔发已经有富氧的大气层，以及不虞匮乏的粮食。而且，银河帝国其他世界都不会觊觎这个世界，因为对于一个环绕双星的行星，人们总会有某种自然而然的嫌恶。在这种星系中，我想，适合人类居住的行星太少了，即使是各方面条件都适合的行星，也没有任何人愿意理睬，人们会先人为主地认为一定有什么问题。这是种普遍的思考模式，比如说，有个很着名的例子，是……”
“待会儿再谈那个着名的例子，詹诺夫，”崔维兹说：“现在先讲那次迁徙的事。”
“剩下来的工作，”裴洛拉特将说话速度加快些，“就是准备一个陆上据点。帝国工作人员找到海洋最浅的部分，再将较深部分的沉淀物挖起来，加到那个最浅的海底，最后造出了这个新地球岛。海底的圆石和珊瑚也被掘起，全数放到这个岛上。然后他们在上面种植陆地植物，想要藉着植物根部巩固这块新的陆地。这个工程也相当浩大，也许最初计划要造几块大陆，可是这座岛屿造好之后，帝国一时的慈悲已冷却下来。
“地球上残存的人口尽数送到此地之后，帝国舰队便将工作人员和机械设备全部载走，从此再也没有回来。那些移居新地球的地球人，很快就发现他们完全与世隔绝。”
崔维兹说：“完全与世隔绝？难道单姓李说，在我们之前，从未有人从银河其他世界来到此地？”
“几乎完全隔绝，”裴洛拉特说：“即使不考虑人们对双星系的迷信式反感，我想也没有人有必要来这里。每隔很长一段时间，偶尔会有艘船舰来到，就像我们现在这样，不过最后终究会离去，也没有其他船舰陆续跟来。故事到此为止。”
崔维兹说：“你有没有问单姓李地球在哪里？”
“我当然问了，他不知道。”
“他知道那么多有关地球的历史，怎么会不知道它在哪里？”
“我还特别问他，葛兰，问他那颗距离阿尔发大约一秒差距的恒星，会不会就是地球环绕的太阳。但他不晓得秒差距是什么，我说就天文尺度而言是个短距离。他说不论是长是短，他都不知道地球在何处，也不知道有什么人晓得。而且他认为试图寻找地球是很不当的举动。他还说，应该让地球永远在太空中安详地飘泊。”
崔维兹说：“你同意他的看法吗？”
裴洛拉特摇了摇头，神情显得很悲伤。“并不尽然。不过他说，照放射性增强的速率来看，在迁徙计划实施不久后，地球一定就变得完全不可住人；而现在，它一定燃烧得极为炽烈，因此根本没有人能接近。”
“荒谬。”崔维兹以坚决的口吻说：“一颗行星不会突然变得具有放射性，即使真是这样，放射性也不会继续增强，只会不断减弱。”
“可是单姓李非常肯定。我们在各个世界上遇到那么多人，对于地球具有放射性这一点，说法也是完全一致——我们继续找下去当然毫无意义。”
80
崔维兹深深吸了一口气，尽量克制自己的声音说：“荒谬，那不是真的。”
裴洛拉特说：“喂，老弟，你不能因为想相信一件事，就去相信那件事。”
“这跟我想做什么没关系。我们在每个世界上，都发现所有的地球资料被清除殆尽。如果地球是个充满放射性的死星，没有人能接近，又如果根本没什么好隐藏的，那些资料为什么会被清掉呢？”
“我不知道，葛兰。”
“不，你知道。在我们接近梅尔波美尼亚时，你曾说过销毁纪录和放射性可能是一体两面。销毁纪录是为了除去正确的资料，散播放射性的故事是为了制造假情报，两者都缓箢人打消找寻地球的念头。我们绝不能上当，不能这么轻易放弃。”
宝绮思说：“其实，你似乎认定附近那颗恒星就是地球之阳，那么为何还要争辩放射性的问题呢？那又有什么关系？何不干脆前往附近那颗恒星，看看地球是否在那里；若是真在那里，它又是什么模样？”
崔维兹说：“因为地球上的居民——不论他们是何方神圣——必定具有超凡的力量，我希望在接近之前，能对那个世界和居民先有点了解。事实上，既然我对地球始终一无所知，贸然前进是件很危险的事。所以我打算将你们几位留在阿尔发，由我单独向地球进军，赌一条命就很够了。”
“不，葛兰。”裴洛拉特急切地说：“宝绮思和那孩子也许该留在这儿，但我必须跟你一道去。在你尚未出生之前，我已经开始寻找地球，现在距离目标那么近，我绝不能裹足不前，不论可能有什么危险。”
“宝绮思和那孩子不缓篝在这儿。”宝绮思说：“我就是盖娅，即使和地球正面对峙，盖娅也能保护我们。”
“我希望你说得没错，”崔维兹绷着脸说：“但是盖娅就没有保住它的早期记忆，它完全忘了地球在它建立之初所扮演的角色。”
“那是盖娅早期历史上发生的事，当时它还不够组织化，也还不够进化，如今已不可同日而语。”
“我希望如此——或者是今天早上，你获得了些我们不知道的地球资料？我曾经特别拜托你，要你设法找些年长的妇女谈谈。”
“我照做了。”
崔维兹说：“你有什么新发现？”
“没有关于地球的资料，这方面完全空白。”
“啊——”
“不过我发现他们拥有很先进的生物科技。”
“哦？”
“虽然这座小岛上原先只有少数几种生物，但他们试育出无数品种的动植物，并设计出合宜的生态平衡，既稳定又能自给自足。他们数千年前抵达时发现的海洋生物，现在已大为改良，营养价值增加许多，而且更美味可口。就是由于他们的生物科技，才使这个世界变成丰饶的世外桃源。此外，他们对本身也有些计划。”
“什么样的计划？”
宝绮思说：“他们心中十分清楚，在目前这种情况下，他们局限在一小块陆地上，根本无法指望扩张生存领域，不过他们梦想能变成两栖类。”
“变成什么？”
“两栖类。他们计划发展出类似鳃的组织，来辅助肺脏的呼吸功能。他们梦想能在水中停留极长的时间，还梦想能找到其他浅水区域，在海底建造人工建筑。提供这些讯息给我的人，想到这点就非常兴奋，不过她也承认，阿尔发人为这个目标努力了好几世纪，而进展却小得可怜。”
崔维兹说：“他们在气候控制和生物科技这两个领域上很可能比我们先进，不知他们用的是什么技术。”
“我们必须找到专家，”宝绮思说：“但他们也许不愿意讲。”
崔维兹说：“这不是我们来此的王要目的，但基地若向这个袖珍世界学习，显然必将获益匪浅。”
裴洛拉特说：“事实上，我们在端点星也有办法把气候控制得很好。”
“很多世界上都控制得不错，”崔维兹说：“但控制的总是一个世界的整体气候。可是在阿尔发，控制的则是局部地区的天气，他们一定拥有我们所欠缺的技术——你还打听到了什么，宝绮思？”
“社交邀宴方面——他们似乎是个善于度假的民族，只要不必耕作或捕鱼，他们都在享受假期。今晚用餐后有个音乐节，我已经告诉你们了。明天白天将举行一个海滩庆典，可想而知，能放下田间工作的人都会聚在岛屿四周，享受嬉水的乐趣，并且乘机赞美太阳，因为再过一天便会下雨。后天早上，渔船队会赶在下雨前回来，当天傍晚又要举行一个美食节，让大家品尝这次的渔获。”
裴洛拉特哼了一声。“平常每餐都那么丰盛了，美食节不知道会是个什么样的盛况？”
“我猜它的特色不在量多，而在口味变化无穷。反正我们四个人都获邀参加所有的活动，尤其是今晚的音乐节。”
“演奏古老乐器？”崔维兹问。
“没错。”
“对了，为什么说它们是古老乐器？原始电脑吗？”
“不，不对。那正是着点，它根本不是电子合成乐，而是机械式的音乐。根据她们的描述，演奏方式是摩擦细线、对管于吹气，以及敲打一些皮面。”
“你没乱讲吧。”崔维兹显得很惊讶。
“不，我没有。我还知道你的广子也会上台，她要吹一种管子——我忘了它的名称——你应该能忍受的。”
“至于我嘛，”裴洛拉特说：“我很高兴有这个机会。我对原始音乐知道得非常少，希望能亲耳听听。”
“她不是‘我的广子’，”崔维兹冷冷地说：“可是依你看，那些乐器是否曾在地球流行？”
“我就是这么猜测，”宝绮思说：“至少阿尔发妇人们告诉我，在他们祖先来到此地前，那些乐器早就发明出来了。”
“这样的话，”崔维兹说：“也许值得听听那些摩擦、吹气和敲打声，只要有可能搜集到一点有关地球的资料。”
81
说来真奇怪，在他们四个人之中，要数菲龙对傍晚的音乐会最感兴奋。接近黄昏的时候，她与宝绮思在住屋后面的小盥洗间洗了一个澡。盥洗间里有个浴池，备有源源不绝的冷热水（或者应该说是凉水与温水），还有一个洗脸盆与一个室内便器，那些设备都既清洁又合用。在偏西的阳光照耀下，盥洗间内光线充足，气氛令人心旷神怡。
苞往常一样，菲龙对宝绮思的乳房十分着迷，宝绮思只好说（既然菲龙已听得懂银河标准语）在她的世界上，大家都是这个样子。对于这种说法，菲龙难免反问道：“为什么？”宝绮思想了一阵子，发觉根本没有一个说得通的解释，于是回了一句万试万灵的答案：“因为就是这样！”
洗完澡后，宝绮思帮菲龙穿上阿尔发人提供的内衣，并研究出套上裙子的正确方法。菲龙腰部以上什么也没穿，这样似乎无伤大雅又入境随俗。至于宝绮思自己，虽然腰部以下穿了阿尔发人的服装（臀部觉得有点紧），却仍罩上了她的上衫。在一个女性普遍袒胸的社会中，坚拒裸露胸部好像有点傻气，尤其她的乳房并未太过丰满，而且秀挺不输此地任何一位女性，然而——她还是穿上了。
接下来轮铲两位男士使用盥洗间。崔维兹喃喃抱怨一番，就像男士们通常的反应一样，抱怨女士们占用了太久时间。
宝绮思让菲龙转过身来，以确定裙子能褂讪在她那男孩一样的臀部上。“这是一条很漂后的裙子，菲龙，你喜欢吗？”
菲龙瞪着镜中的裙子说：“我很喜欢，可是，我上身没穿衣服会不会冷？”说完，她用手摸了摸裸露的胸部。
“我想不会的，菲龙，这个世界相当暖和。”
“你却穿了衣服。”
“没错，我的确穿了，因为在我的世界上大家都这么穿。现在，菲龙，我们要去和很多很多阿尔发人共进晚餐，晚餐后还会跟他们在一起，你觉得自己可以受得了吗？”
菲龙显得很苦恼，于是宝绮思继续说：“我会坐在你的右边，还会抱住你；裴将坐在另一侧，崔维兹将坐在你对面。我们不会让任何人跟你讲话，你也不需要跟任何人交谈。”
“我会试试看，宝绮思。”菲龙以最高亢的尖声应道。
“晚餐以后，”宝绮思又说：“有些阿尔发人会用他们的特殊方法为我们演奏音乐。你知道音乐是什么吗？”她哼出一些音调，尽量模仿着电子和声。
菲龙突然变得神采奕奕。“你的意思是XX？”最后一个词是她的母语，说完她就唱起歌来。
宝绮思瞪大了眼睛。那的确是个优美的调子，虽然有些狂野，而且充满颤音。她说：“对啦，那就是音乐。”
菲龙兴奋地说：“健比随时都会制造——”她犹豫一下，然后决定用银河标准语：“音乐，它制造音乐用的是XX。”最后一个词她又用了母语。
宝绮思迟疑地着复着那个词：“哼嘀？”
菲龙听了大笑。“不是哼嘀，是XX。”
两个词这样放在一起念，宝绮思也听得出其中的差异，但她仍然无法正确念出后者。她改问：“它的外形是什么样子？”
菲龙学到的银河标准语词汇有限，无法做出正确的描述，她比手划脚半天，宝绮思心中还是没有一个清晰的图样。
“它教我怎么用XX。”菲龙以骄傲的口吻说：“我的手指动得和健比一样，可是它说我很快就不必再用手指。”
“那实在太好了，亲爱的。”宝绮思说：“晚餐后，我们就能知道阿尔发人是否和健比演奏得一样好。”
菲龙双眼发出光芒，心中充满快乐的期待，因此晚餐时虽被群众、笑声与噪音包围，她仍然享受了丰盛的一餐。只有一次，一个餐盘被人不小心打翻，引起邻近一阵尖声喧哗，菲龙才现出惊骇的表情。宝绮思赶快紧紧搂住她，让她能有安全温暖的感觉。
“不知道能否安排我们单独用餐。”她对裴洛拉特悄声说道：“否则的话，我们就得赶快离开这个世界。吃这些孤立体的动物性蛋白已经够糟，至少要让我能静静地下咽。”
“他们只是心情太好了。”裴洛拉特说。凡事只要他认为属于原始行为或原始信仰，在合理范围内他会尽量忍受。
晚餐随即结束，接着便有人宣布音乐节马上开始。
82
举行音乐节的大厅跟餐厅差不多同样宽敞，里面摆着许多张摺椅（崔维兹发现坐起来相当不舒服），可供一百五十几人就坐。他们这几位访客是今晚的贵宾，因此被带到最前排，不少阿尔发人客气地赞赏他们的服装样式。
两位男士腰部以上完全赤裸，每当崔维兹想到这点，便会收紧他的腹肌，偶尔还会低头看一看，对自己长满黑色胸毛的胸膛十分自满。裴洛拉特则忙着观察周遭的一切，对自己的模样毫不在意。宝绮思的上衫吸引了许多疑惑的目光，不过大家只是偷偷看着，没有当面发表任何评论。
崔维兹注意到大厅差不多只坐了半满，而且绝大部分的观众是妇女，想必是因为许多男人都出海去了。
裴洛拉特用手肘轻推了崔维兹一下，悄声道：“他们拥有电力。”
崔维兹看了看挂在墙上的垂直玻璃管，还注意到天花板上也有一些，那些玻璃管都发出柔和的光芒。
“是萤光，”他说：“相当原始。”
“没错，不过一样能照明。我们的房间和盥洗间也有这些东西，我本来以为只是装饰用的。如果我们弄清楚如何操作，晚上就不必摸黑了。”
宝绮思不悦地说：“他们应该告诉我们。”
裴洛拉特说：“他们以为我们知道，以为任何人都该知道。”
此时四名女子从幕后出现，走到大厅前方的场地，然后彼此紧邻着坐下来。每个人都拿着一个上漆的木制乐器，它们的外形相似，不过形状不太容易描述。那些乐器的主要差别在于大小不同，其中一个相当小，两个稍大些，另一个则相当大。除此之外，每人另一只手里还拿着一根长长的杆子。
她们四人进场时，观众发出轻柔的口哨声，她们则向观众鞠躬致意。四个人的乳房都用薄纱紧紧裹住，仿佛为了避免碰触乐器而影响演出。
崔维兹将口啃声解释为赞许或欣喜的期待，感到自己礼貌上也该这么做。菲龙则发出一个比口哨尖锐许多的颤音，宝绮思马上紧紧抓住她，但在她停止前，已经引起一些观众的注意。
四名演出的女子中，有三位未做任何准备动作，便将她们的乐器置于须下，不过最大的那个乐器仍放在地上，夹在那位演奏者双腿之间。每个人右手的长杆开始前后拉动，摩擦着近乎横跨整个乐器的几条细线，左手的手指则在细线末端来回游移。
崔维兹心想，这大概就是想像中的“摩擦”吧，不过听来完全不像摩擦发出的声音。他听到的是一连串轻柔而旋律优美的音符，每个乐器各自演奏不同的部分，融合在一起就变得分外悦耳。
它缺少电子音乐（“真正的音乐”，崔维兹不由自主这么想）无穷的复杂度，而且有明显的着复。然而，当他慢慢听下去，他的耳朵就渐渐习惯这种奇特的音律，开始领略出其中的微妙。但需要如此细听却容易使人疲倦，因此他分外怀念真实音乐的纯粹、数学化的精准，以及震耳欲聋的音量。不过他也想到，如果听久了这些简单木制乐器的音乐，他想必也会渐渐喜欢。
等到广于终于出场的时候，演奏会已进行了约四十五分钟。她立刻注意到崔维兹坐在最前排，于是向他微微一笑，他则诚心诚意地轻吹口哨，跟其他观众一起为她暍采。广子打扮得非常漂后，穿着一条精致无比的长裙，头上戴了一大朵花。她的乳房完全裸露，（显然）因为它不会影响到乐器的演奏。
她的乐器原来是一根黑色的木管，长度大约三分之二公尺，直径约有两公分。她将那个乐器凑到唇边，对着末端附近的开口吹气，便产生了一个纤细甜美的音调。她的手指操纵着遍布管身的金属物件，随着她手指的动作，音调有了忽高忽低的变化。
罢听到第一个调，菲龙立刻抓住宝绮思的手臂说：“宝绮思，那就是XX。”那个名字听来很像“哼嘀”。
宝绮思冲着菲龙坚决地摇了摇头，菲龙却压低声音说：“但它的确是啊！”
臂众纷纷朝菲龙这边望来，宝绮思将手用力按在菲龙嘴巴上，然后低下头来，冲着她耳朵轻声说：“安静！”这句话声音虽小，对下意识而言却可算强而有力。
菲龙果然开始安静地欣赏广子的演奏，但她的手指不时舞动着，好像是她在操纵那个乐器上的金属物件。
最后一位演出者是个老头，他的乐器挂在双肩，乐器两侧有许多皱褶。演奏的时候，他左手将那些皱褶拉来拉去，右手在另一侧黑白相问的键上快速掠过，同时按下一组一组的键。
崔维兹觉得这个乐器的声音特别无趣，而且相当粗野，听来不太舒服，使他联想到奥罗拉野狗的吠声——并非由于乐声像狗叫，而是两者引发的情绪极为类似。宝绮思看来像是想用双手按住耳朵，裴洛拉特的脸孔也皱了起来。只有菲龙似乎很欣赏，一只脚还轻轻打着拍子。当崔维兹注意到她的动作时，发现音乐节拍与菲龙的拍子竟然完全吻合，令他感到非常惊讶。
演奏终于结束，观众报以一阵激烈的口哨声，菲龙发出的颤音则盖过了所有声音。
然后观众开始三五成群闲聊起来，场面变得相当吵杂，不输阿尔发人其他聚会的喧哗秤谌。每位演出者都站在观众席前，跟前来道贺的人亲切交谈。
菲龙突然挣脱宝绮思的掌握，向广子冲过去。
“广子，”她一面喘气，一面喊道：“让我看看那个XX。”
“看什么，小可爱？”广子说。
“你刚才用来制造音乐的东西。”
“喔，”广子大笑一声，“那唤作横笛，小家伙。”
“我可以看看吗？”
“好吧。”广子打开一个盒子，掏出那件乐器。它现在被拆解成三部分，不过广子很快就将它结合起来，然后递到菲龙面前，吹口对准她的嘴唇。“来，尊驾对着这儿吹气。”
“我知道，我知道。”菲龙一面急切地说，一面伸手要拿笛子。
便子自然而然抽回手去，又将笛子高高举起。“用嘴吹，孩子，但勿碰。”
菲龙似乎很失望。“那么，我可不可以看看就好？我不会碰它。”
“当然行，小可爱。”
她又将笛子递出去，菲龙便一本正经瞪着它看。
室内的萤光灯突然微微变暗，同时笛子发出一个音调，听来有些迟疑不定。
便子吓了一跳，险些让笛子掉到地上，菲龙却高声喊道：“我做到了，我做到了，健比说总有一天我能做到。”
便子说：“方才是尊驾弄出的声音？”
“对，是我，是我。”
“然而尊驾是怎样做到的，孩子？”
宝绮思感到很不好意思，红着脸说：“我很抱歉，广子，我现在就带她走。”
“不，”广子说：“我希望她再做一回。”
敖近几个阿尔发人已经围过来旁观，菲龙挤眉弄眼，仿佛很努力在尝试。萤光变得比刚才更暗淡，笛子忽然间又发出一个音调，这次的声音听来既纯又稳。然后，遍布笛身的金属按键自己动起来，笛子的音调有了不规律的变化。
“它和XX有点不一样。”菲龙有些上气不接下气，仿佛吹笛子的是她本人，而不是电力驱动的气流。
裴洛拉特对崔维兹说：“她一定是从萤光灯的电源取得能量。”
“再试一回。”广子以惊愕的声音说。
菲龙闭上眼睛，笛声现在变得较柔和，也被控制得更稳定，在没有手指按动的情况下，笛子自己演奏起来。来自远方的能量，经过菲龙大脑中尚未成熟的叶突，转换成了驱动笛子的动能。最初几乎是随机出现的音调，现在变成一连串的旋律，将大厅中每一个人都吸引过来，大家全部围在广子与菲龙周围。广子用拇指与食指轻轻抓着笛子两端，菲龙则始终闭着眼睛，指挥着空气的流动与按键的动作。
“这是我方才演奏的曲子。”广子悄声道。
“我都记得。”菲龙只是轻轻点了点头，尽量不让自己的注意力分散。
“尊驾未遗漏任何一个音符。”一曲结束后，广子这么说。
“可是你那样不对，广子，你吹得不对。”
宝绮思赶紧说：“菲龙！这样说没礼貌，你不可以……”
“拜托，”广子断然道：“请勿打断她的话。为何不对，孩子？”
“因为我能吹得不一样。”
“那么表演一下。”
于是笛声再度响起，不过曲式较先前复杂，因为驱动按键的力量变化得更快，转换得更迅速，组合也更为精致细腻。奏出的音乐比刚才更繁复，而且更感性、更动人无数倍。广子不禁僵立在那里，整个大厅中也听不到其他声音。
甚至当菲龙演奏完毕后，大厅中仍是一片鸦雀无声。最后还是由广子打破沉默，她深深吸了一口气，然后说：“尊驾曾如此演奏过吗？”
“没有，”菲龙说：“以前我只能用手指，可是我用手指做不到那样。”
接着，她又以干脆而毫不自夸的口气，补充了一句：“没有人办得到。”
“尊驾还会演奏其他曲子吗？”
“我能制作一些。”
“尊驾的意思是——即兴演奏？”
菲龙皱起眉头，显然听不懂这个词，只好朝宝绮思望去。宝绮思对她点了点头，于是菲龙答道：“是的。”
“那么，请示范一番。”广子说。
菲龙默想了一两分钟，然后笛声开始奏起，那是一连串缓慢而简单的音符，整体而言带着如梦似幻的感觉。萤光灯变得时明时暗，全由电力被抽取的多寡而定。这点似乎没人注意到，因为光线的变化似乎成了音乐所带来的特殊效果，就像有个电力幽灵正听命于声波的指挥而不停变化着。
这些音符的组合一再着复，先是音量变得较大，然后曲调渐趋繁复。接下来成了变奏，在基本旋律仍清晰可闻的情况下，曲调变得更激昂、更有力，渐渐催逼到令人喘不过气来。最后，缓缓升到最高点的旋律突然急转直下，造成一种俯冲的效果，带着听众迅速落回地面；众人却仍陶醉在置身高空的感觉。
接着，一阵前所未有的混乱撕裂宁静的空气。崔维兹虽然习惯于另一种完全不同的音乐，也不禁感伤地想道：我再也听不到这么美妙的音乐了。
等到众人好不容易安静下来后，广子将笛子递了出去。“来，菲龙，这是尊驾的！”
菲龙迫不及待要接过来，宝绮思却抓住她伸出去的手臂说：“我们不能拿，广子，它是件珍贵的乐器。”
“我另外有一个，宝绮思，虽比不上这个好，但这是我应当做的。谁能将这乐器奏得最美妙，谁便是其主人。我从未听过如此之音乐，既然我无法发挥其全部潜力，我拥有这乐器即是错误。我希望早就知晓如何得以隔空演奏。”
菲龙接过笛子，现出极其满足的表情，将它紧紧抱在胸前。
83
现在，他们的住所两个房间各后起一盏萤光灯，此外盥洗间也后起一盏。这些灯光都很微弱，在灯下阅读会相当吃力，但至少不再是一片黑暗。
然而此刻他们却逗留在屋外。夜空中满布星辰，这种景象总是令端点星土生土长的人着迷。端点星的夜空几乎不见什么星辰，唯一显眼的天体是暗淡的银河，看来像是极远方的一团云气。
便子刚才陪同他们一道回来，因为她担心他们会在黑暗中迷路或摔倒，一路上她都牵着菲龙的手。直到她帮他们打开萤光灯，跟他们一起待在室外的时候，她牵着那孩子的乎仍未放开。
宝绮思心里很清楚，知道广子正处于难以决断的情感矛盾中，因此她决定再试一次。“真的，广子，我们不能拿你的笛子。”
“不，菲龙万万要收下。”但她似乎仍然犹豫不决。
崔维兹一直望着天空。此地的黑夜名副其实，虽然他们的房间透出一点光后，却几乎没什么影响，更遑论远处建筑物射出的微弱灯火。
他说：“广子，你看到那颗分外明后的星星吗？它叫什么名字？”
便子抬头瞄了一下，并未显出什么兴趣。“那是‘伴星’。”
“为什么叫这个名字？”
“每八十个标准年，它便环绕我们太阳一周。每年这个时候，它都是一颗‘昏星’。尊驾在白昼亦能见到它，倘若它徘徊于地平线之上。”
很好，崔维兹想，她对天文并非一无所知。他又说：“你可知道，阿尔发还有另一颗伴星，它非常小、非常暗淡，比这颗明后的伴星遥远许多许多，不用望远镜根本看不见。”（他自己没有见过，但他不必花时间搜寻，太空艇电脑的记忆库中有详尽的资料。）
她以冷淡的语气答道：“我们在学校学过。”
“好，那颗又叫什么？那六颗排成锯齿状的星星，你看到了吗？”
便子说：“那是仙后。”
“真的？”崔维兹吃了一惊，“哪一颗？”
“全部，整个锯齿唤作仙后。”
“为什么叫这个名字？”
“我缺乏这方面的知识，我对天文学一窍不通，尊贵的崔维兹。”
“你看到锯齿最下面的那颗星吗？就是其中最后的那颗，它叫什么？”
“它就是一颗星，我不知其名。”
“除了两颗伴星之外，它是最接近阿尔发的恒星，距离大约只有一秒差距。”
便于说：“尊驾如此认为？我不知晓。”
“它会不会就是地球环绕的恒星？”
便子盯着那颗星，些微兴趣一闪即逝。“我不知晓，我从未听人那样说。”
“你不认为有这个可能吗？”
“叫我如何说？无人知晓地球究竟在何处。我——我如今必须向尊驾告辞。明天上午海滩节之前，轮到我在田间工作。午餐后我在海滩跟您们碰面。好吗？”
“当然好，广子。”
她立刻转身离去，在黑暗中慢慢跑开。崔维兹望着她的背影一会儿，便跟其他人走进昏暗的小房舍。
他问：“有关地球的事，你能不能判断她是否在说谎，宝绮思？”
宝绮思摇了摇头，说道：“不，我不认为她在说谎。她的精神处于极度紧张的状态，我直到演奏会结束才察觉到。在你向她问及那些星星之前，她就已经那么紧张了。”
“那么，是因为她舍弃了那支笛子？”
“大概吧，我也不清楚。”她转头对菲龙说：“菲龙，我要你现在回到自己房间。你上床之前，先到盥洗间去尿尿，然后洗洗手，再洗洗脸，刷刷牙。”
“我很想演奏那支笛子，宝绮思。”
“只能玩一会儿，而且要非常小声。懂了吗，菲龙？还有，我叫你停的时候就一定要停。”
“好的，宝绮思。”
于是这个房间中只剩下三个人，宝绮思坐在一张椅子上，两位男士则坐在各自的便床上。
宝绮思说：“还有必要在这颗行星继续待下去吗？”
崔维兹耸了耸肩。“我们一直没机会讨论地球和那些古老乐器间的关系，或许我们可以从那里发现什么线索。而且，渔船队可能也值得我们等一等，那些男人可能知道些待在家的人不知道的事。”
“可能性太小了。”宝绮思说：“你确定不是广子的黑眼珠吸引你留下来？”
崔维兹以不耐烦的语气说：“我不了解，宝绮思，我选择该怎么做跟你有何相干？为什么你好像总要显得高高在上，板起面孔对我做道德判断？”
“我并不关心你的道德，但这件事会影响到我们的探索。你想要找到地球，好对你自己的选择做最后的验证，看看你否定孤立体世界，选择盖娅星系的抉择是否正确，我希望你能找到答案。你说你必须造访地球，然后才能做出决定，而你似乎坚信地球就环绕着天空中那颗后星，那么就让我们到那里去探个究竟。我承认，在我们出发前若能找到一些资料，的确会有帮助，可是我相当清楚，在这里找不到我们需要的资料。我可不愿由于你喜欢广子，就让大家留在这里陪你。”
“我们或许会离开这里，”崔维兹说：“让我考虑一下。广子这个因素不会左右我的决定，我向你保证。”
裴洛拉特说：“我觉得我们应该向地球前进，即使只是为了看看它到底有没有放射性。我看下出待下去有什么意义。”
“你确定不是宝绮思的黑眼珠迷惑了你？”崔维兹这话有些报复的意味。他几乎立刻就后悔了：“不，我收回这句话，詹诺夫，我只是一时孩子气发作。话说回来——这是个迷人的世界，即使完全不考虑广子，我也不得不承认，要不是在现在这种情况下，我会忍下住永远留下来。难道你看不出来吗，宝绮思，阿尔发使你对孤立体的理论不攻自破？”
“怎么说？”宝绮思问。
“你一直坚持一种理论，任何真正孤立的世界都会变得危险而充满敌意。”
“就连康普隆也一样，”宝绮思以平静的口吻说：“即使它不能算是处于银河的主流，虽然在理论上它是基地联邦的一个联合势力。”
“伹阿尔发不同，这个世界虽然完全孤立，可是你能抱怨他们的友善和殷勤吗？他们提供我们食物、衣物、住宿场所，还为我们举行各种庆祝活动，盛情地邀请我们留下来。对他们还有什么好挑剔的？”
“表面上没什么，广子甚至将她的身体给了你。”
崔维兹怒冲冲地说：“宝绮思，这件事哪里又妨碍到你了？不是她将身体给了我，而是我们互相奉献，这全然是两情相悦。在适当情况下，你也一定会毫不迟疑地献出自己的身体。”
“拜托，宝绮思，”裴洛拉特说：“葛兰完全正确，我们没有理由反对他的私人享乐。”
“只要不影响到我们的行动。”宝绮思执拗地说。
“不会影响我们，”崔维兹说：“我们将很快离开这里，我向你保证。耽搁一下是为了搜集更多资料，不会花太久的时间。”
“但我还是不信任孤立体，”宝绮思说：“即使他们捧着礼物前来。”
崔维兹举起双手。“先得出结论，然后再扭曲证据去迁就，简直就是——”
“别说出来，”宝绮思以警告的口吻说：“我可不是女人，我是盖哑娅。感到不安的是盖娅，不是我。”
“没有理由——”此时，门上突然发出一下搔抓声。
崔维兹愣住了。“那是什么？”他低声道。
宝绮思轻轻耸了耸肩。“拉开门看看，你说过这是个亲善的世界，不会发生任何危险。”
尽避如此，崔维兹仍踌躇不前。不久门外传来轻声的叫喊：“拜托，是我！”
那是广子的声音，崔维兹立刻将门掀开。
便子快步走进来，她的两颊满是泪水。
“将门拉上。”她气喘吁吁地说。
“怎么回事？”宝绮思问。
便子紧紧抓住崔维兹。“我无法置身事外，我尝试过，然而我承受不了。尊驾快走，您们全部走，带那孩儿与您们一道离去。驾着那艘太空船驶离——驶离阿尔发——趁着天色仍暗之际。”
“可是为什么呢？”崔维兹问。
“否则尊驾将丧命，您们全部将丧命。”
84
三位外星人士目不转晴盯着广子良久，然后崔维兹说：“你是说你的族人会杀害我们？”
便子两行热泪滚滚而下。“尊驾已踏上死亡之途，尊贵的崔维兹，其他人也将陪伴您。很久以前，学者们发明出一种病毒，对我们无害，我们具有晃疫力，然而对外星人士有致命威胁。”她心慌意乱地摇着崔维兹的手臂，“尊驾已经感染。”
“怎么会？”
“当我们交欢时，那即是管道之一。”
崔维兹说：“但我不觉得有什么不对劲。”
“病毒街在潜伏，渔船队归来后才会让它们发作。根据我们的法律，这种事必须经过全体决议，甚至包括所有男人，大家必将决定非如此做不可。我们负责让您们留下，直到做出决议之时，亦即后天早上——如今趁着天黑又无人起疑，赶紧走吧。”
宝绮思厉声问道：“你的族人为什么要这样做？”
“为了我们的安全，我们人稀物丰，不希望外星人士侵犯我们。若果有人来访之后，将我们的位置传出去，其他人将接踵而来。因此之故，每隔很长一段时日，偶尔有一艘太空船抵达，我们便需确保它不再离去。”
“可是既然如此，”崔维兹说：“为什么你要来通风报信？”
“勿问缘由——好，我将告诉您们，因我又听到了，听——”
他们都听到了，隔壁房间传来菲龙奏出的辍柔笛声——甜美无比的笛声。
便子说：“我无法忍受这音乐自人间消失，因为小家伙亦将死去。”
崔维兹以严厉的口吻说：“是不是因为这样，你才把笛子送给菲龙？因为你知道她死了之后，你可以再拿回去。”
便子看来惊愕万分。“不然，我心中未有这般想法。当我终于想到之际，即明了绝不该如此做。带着那孩儿离去吧，也带走那支我再也见不到的笛子。尊驾回到太空便安全，尊驾体内的病毒只要不发作，一段时日后便会死亡。我所求的回报，是您们不再提起这个世界，勿让他人知晓它的存在。”
“我们不会说出去。”崔维兹说。
便子抬起头来，低声道：“尊驾离去之前，我能否再吻尊驾一回？”
崔维兹说：“不，我被感染一次已经够了。”然后他用较和缓的口气说：“别哭，否则别人问你为什么哭，你将无言以对——看在你如今力图拯救我们的份上，我原谅你对我所做的伤害。”
便子抬头挺胸，用双手手背仔细拭干脸颊，又深深吸了一口气。“我感谢尊驾宽恕。”随即匆匆离去。
崔维兹说：“我们马上把灯关掉，在屋里等一会儿，然后离开这里——宝绮思，叫菲龙别再玩她的乐器。当然，记得将笛子带走。我们得一路摸到太空船那里，希望在黑暗中还能找到它的位置。”
“我找得到。”宝绮思说：“太空船上有我的衣物，不论成分多微弱，它仍算盖娅的一部分，盖娅寻找盖娅不会有问题。”说完，她就钻进她的房间去找菲龙。
裴洛拉特说：“你想他们会不会设法破坏太空船，迫使我们留在这里？”
“他们的科技还做不到这一点。”崔维兹绷着脸说。宝绮思牵着菲龙走出来之后，崔维兹便将灯火尽数熄灭。
他们一声不响地在黑暗中坐了大约半小时，感觉却好像足足等了大半夜。然后崔维兹缓缓地、悄悄地拉开门。夜空似乎多了一点云气，不过群星仍在闪烁。现在仙后星座高挂中天，底端那颗可能是地球之阳的恒星，正发出耀眼的光芒。四周静寂无声，连一丝风都没有。
崔维兹小心翼翼踏出房门，再示意其他人跟出来。他一只手自然而然挪到神经鞭的握柄上，虽然他确定不会用到，不过……
宝绮思带头走在前面，她一只手拉着裴洛拉特，裴洛拉特又拉着崔维兹；宝绮思另一只手拉着菲龙，菲龙另一只手握着笛子。在几乎全黑的暗夜中，宝绮思双脚轻轻探着路，引领大家朝远星号上极微弱的“盖娅感”前进。

Part Seven - EarthChapter 19: Radioactive?
85The Far Star took off quietly, rising slowlythrough the atmosphere, leaving the dark island below. The few faintdots of light beneath them dimmed and vanished, and as the atmospheregrew thinner with height, the ship's speed grew greater, and the dotsof light in the sky above them grew more numerous and brighter.
Eventually, they looked down upon the planet, Alpha, with only acrescent illuminated and that crescent largely wreathed in clouds.
Pelorat said, "I suppose they don't have an active spacetechnology. They can't follow us.""I'm not sure that that cheers me up much," said Trevize, his facedour, his voice disheartened. "I'm infected.""But with an inactive strain," said Bliss.
"Still, it can be made active. They had a method. What is themethod?"Bliss shrugged. "Hiroko said the virus, left inactive, would eventuallydie in a body unadapted to it as yours is.""Yes?" said Trevize angrily. "How does she know that? For that matter,how do I know that Hiroko's statement wasn't a self-consoling lie? Andisn't it possible that the method of activation, whatever it is, mightnot be duplicated naturally? A particular chemical, a type of radiation,a a who knows what? I may sicken suddenly, and then thethree of you would die, too. Or if it happens after we have reached apopulated world, there may be a vicious pandemic which fleeing refugeeswould carry to other worlds."He looked at Bliss. "Is there something you can do about it?"Slowly, Bliss shook her head. "Not easily. There are parasites makingup Gaia microorganisms, worms. They are a benign part of theecological balance. They live and contribute to the world consciousness,but never overgrow. They live without doing noticeable harm. The troubleis, Trevize, the virus that affects you is not part of Gaia.""You say `not easily,'" said Trevize, frowning. "Under thecircumstances, can you take the trouble to do it even though it mightbe difficult? Can you locate the virus in me and destroy it? Can you,failing that, at least strengthen my defenses?""Do you realize what you ask, Trevize? I am not acquainted with themicroscopic flora of your body. I might not easily tell a virus in thecells of your body from the normal genes inhabiting them. It would be evenmore difficult to distinguish between viruses your body is accustomed toand those with which Hiroko infected you. I will try to do it, Trevize,but it will take time and I may not succeed.""Take time," said Trevize. "Try.""Certainly," said Bliss.
Pelorat said, "If Hiroko told the truth, Bliss, you might be able tofind viruses that seem to be already diminishing in vitality, and youcould accelerate their decline.""I could do that," said Bliss. "It is a good thought.""You won't weaken?" said Trevize. "You will have to destroy preciousbits of life when you kill those viruses, you know.""You are being sardonic, Trevize," said Bliss coolly, "but, sardonicor not, you are pointing out a true difficulty. Still, I can scarcelyfail to put you ahead of the virus. I will kill them if I have thechance, never fear. After all, even if I fail to consider you" andher mouth twitched as though she were repressing a smile "thencertainly Pelorat and Fallom are also at risk, and you might feel moreconfidence in my feeling for them than in my feeling for you. You mighteven remember that I myself am at risk.""I have no faith in your self-love," muttered Trevize. "You'reperfectly ready to give up your life for some high motive. I'll acceptyour concern for Pelorat, however." Then, he said, "I don't hear Fallom'sflute. Is anything wrong with her?""No," said Bliss. "She's asleep. A perfectly natural sleep that Ihad nothing to do with. And I would suggest that, after you work out theJump to the star we think is Earth's sun, we all do likewise. I need itbadly and I suspect you do, too, Trevize.""Yes, if I can manage. You were right, you know, Bliss.""About what, Trevize?""About Isolates. New Earth was not a paradise, however much itmight have seemed like one. That hospitality all that outgoingfriendliness at first was to put us off our guard, so that oneof us might be easily infected. And all the hospitality afterward,the festivals of this and that, were designed to keep us there till thefishing fleet returned and the activation could be carried through. Andit would have worked but for Fallom and her music. It might be you wereright there, too.""About Fallom?""Yes. I didn't want to take her along, and I've never been happy withher being on the ship. It was your doing, Bliss, that we have her hereand it was she who, unwittingly, saved us. And yet ""And yet what?""Despite that, I'm still uneasy at Fallom's presence. Idon't know why.""If it will make you feel better, Trevize, I don't know that we canlay all the credit at Fallom's feet. Hiroko advanced Fallom's music asher excuse for committing what the other Alphans would surely considerto be an act of treason. She may even have believed this, but there wassomething in her mind in addition, something that I vaguely detectedbut could not surely identify, something that perhaps she was ashamed tolet emerge into her conscious mind. I am under the impression that shefelt a warmth for you, and would not willingly see you die, regardlessof Fallom and her music.""Do you really think so?" said Trevize, smiling slightly for thefirst time since they had left Alpha.
"I think so. You must have a certain proficiency at dealing withwomen. You persuaded Minister Lizalor to allow us to take our shipand leave Comporellon, and you helped influence Hiroko to save ourlives. Credit where it's due."Trevize smiled more broadly. "Well, if you say so. On to Earth,then." He disappeared into the pilot-room with a step that was almostjaunty.
Pelorat, lingering behind, said, "You soothed him after all, didn'tyou, Bliss?""No, Pelorat, I never touched his mind.""You certainly did when you pampered his male vanity sooutrageously.""Entirely indirect," said Bliss, smiling.
"Even so, thank you, Bliss."86After the Jump, the star that might well be Earth'ssun was still a tenth of a parsec away. It was the brightest object inthe sky by far, but it was still no more than a star.
Trevize kept its light filtered for ease of viewing, and studiedit somberly.
He said, "There seems no doubt that it is the virtual twin of Alpha,the star that New Earth circles. Yet Alpha is in the computer map andthis star is not. We don't have a name for this star, we aren't givenits statistics, we lack any information concerning its planetary system,if it has one."Pelorat said, "Isn't that what we would expect if Earth circlesthis sun? Such a blackout of information would fit with the fact thatall information about Earth seems to have been eliminated.""Yes, but it could also mean that it's a Spacer world that justhappened not to be on the list on the wall of the Melpomenian building. Wecan't be altogether sure that that list was complete. Or this starcould be without planets and therefore perhaps not worth listing ona computer map which is primarily used for military and commercialpurposes. Janov, is there any legend that tells of Earth's sunbeing a mere parsec or so from a twin of itself."Pelorat shook his head. "I'm sorry, Golan, but no such legend occursto me. There may be one, though. My memory isn't perfect. I'll searchfor it.""It's not important. Is there any name given to Earth's sun?""Some different names are given. I imagine there must be a name ineach of the different languages.""I keep forgetting that Earth had many languages.""It must have had. It's the only way of making sense out of many ofthe legends."Trevize said peevishly, "Well, then, what do we do? We can't tellanything about the planetary system from this distance, and we have tomove closer. I would like to be cautious, but there's such a thing asexcessive and unreasoning caution, and I see no evidence of possibledanger. Presumably anything powerful enough to wipe the Galaxy clean ofinformation about Earth may be powerful enough to wipe us out even atthis distance if they seriously did not wish to be located, but nothing'shappened. It isn't rational to stay here forever on the mere possibilitythat something might happen if we move closer, is it?"Bliss said, "I take it the computer detects nothing that might beinterpreted as dangerous.""When I say I see no evidence of possible danger, it's the computerI'm relying on. I certainly can't see anything with the unaided eye. Iwouldn't expect to.""Then I take it you're just looking for support in making what youconsider a risky decision. All right, then. I'm with you. We haven'tcome this far in order to turn back for no reason, have we?""No," said Trevize. "What do you say, Pelorat?"Pelorat said, "I'm willing to move on, if only out of curiosity. Itwould be unbearable to go back without knowing if we have foundEarth.""Well, then," said Trevize, "we're all agreed.""Not all," said Pelorat. "There's Fallom."Trevize looked astonished. "Are you suggesting we consult the child? Ofwhat value would her opinion be even if she had one? Besides, all shewould want would be to get back to her own world.""Can you blame her for that?" asked Bliss warmly.
And because the matter of Fallom had arisen, Trevize became aware ofher flute, which was sounding in a rather stirring march rhythm.
"Listen to her," he said. "Where has she ever heard anything inmarch rhythm?""Perhaps Jemby played marches on the flute for her."Trevize shook his head. "I doubt it. Dance rhythms, I should think,lullabies. Listen, Fallom makes me uneasy. She learns tooquickly.""I help her," said Bliss. "Remember that. Andshe's very intelligent and she has been extraordinarilystimulated in the time she's been with us. New sensations have floodedher mind. She's seen space, different worlds, many people, all for thefirst time."Fallom's march music grew wilder and more richly barbaric.
Trevize sighed and said, "Well, she's here, and she's producing musicthat seems to breathe optimism, and delight in adventure. I'll take thatas her vote in favor of moving in more closely. Let us do so cautiously,then, and check this sun's planetary system.""If any," said Bliss.
Trevize smiled thinly. "There's a planetary system. It's a bet. Chooseyour sum."87"You lose," said Trevize abstractedly. "How much moneydid you decide to bet?""None. I never accepted the wager," said Bliss.
"Just as well. I wouldn't like to accept the money, anyway."They were some 10 billion kilometers from the sun. It was stillstar-like, but it was nearly 1/4,000 as bright as the average sun wouldhave been when viewed from the surface of a habitable planet.
"We can see two planets under magnification, right now," saidTrevize. "From their measured diameters and from the spectrum of thereflected light, they are clearly gas giants."The ship was well outside the planetary plane, and Bliss and Pelorat,staring over Trevize's shoulder at the viewscreen, found themselveslooking at two tiny crescents of greenish light. The smaller was in thesomewhat thicker phase of the two.
Trevize said, "Janov! It is correct, isn't it, that Earth's sun issuppose to have four gas giants.""According to the legends. Yes," said Pelorat.
"The nearest of the four to the sun is the largest, and the secondnearest has rings. Right?""Large prominent rings, Golan. Yes. Just the same, old chap, you haveto allow for exaggeration in the telling and retelling of a legend. If weshould not find a planet with an extraordinary ring system, I don't thinkwe ought to let that count seriously against this being Earth's star.""Nevertheless, the two we see may be the farthest, and the twonearer ones may well be on the other side of the sun and too far to beeasily located against the background of stars. We'll have to move stillcloser and beyond the sun to the other side.""Can that be done in the presence of the star's nearby mass?""With reasonable caution, the computer can do it, I'm sure. If itjudges the danger to be too great, however, it will refuse to budge us,and we can then move in cautious, smaller steps."His mind directed the computer and the starfield on theviewscreen changed. The star brightened sharply and then moved off theviewscreen as the computer, following directions, scanned the sky foranother gas giant. It did so successfully.
All three onlookers stiffened and stared, while Trevize's mind,almost helpless with astonishment, fumbled at the computer to directfurther magnification.
"Incredible," gasped Bliss.
88A gas giant was in view, seen at an angle that allowedmost of it to be sunlit. About it, there curved a broad and brilliantring of material, tipped so as to catch the sunlight on the side beingviewed. It was brighter than the planet itself and along it, one thirdof the way in toward the planet, was a narrow, dividing line.
Trevize threw in a request for maximum enhancement and the ring becameringlets, narrow and concentric, glittering in the sunlight. Only aportion of the ring system was visible on the viewscreen and the planetitself had moved off. A further direction from Trevize and one cornerof the screen marked itself off and showed, within itself, a miniatureof the planet and rings under lesser magnification.
"Is that sort of thing common?" asked Bliss, awed.
"No," said Trevize. "Almost every gas giant has rings of debris, butthey tend to be faint and narrow. I once saw one in which the rings werenarrow, but quite bright. But I never saw anything like this; or heardof it, either."Pelorat said, "That's clearly the ringed giant the legends speakof. If this is really unique ""Really unique, as far as I know, or as far as the computer knows,"said Trevize.
"Then this must be the planetary system containingEarth. Surely, no one could invent such a planet. It would have had tohave been seen to be described."Trevize said, "I'm prepared to believe just about anything your legendssay now. This is the sixth planet and Earth would be the third?""Right, Golan.""Then I would say we were less than 1.5 billion kilometers from Earth,and we haven't been stopped. Gaia stopped us when we approached."Bliss said, "You were closer to Gaia when you were stopped.""Ah," said Trevize, "but it's my opinion Earth is more powerful thanGaia, and I take this to be a good sign. If we are not stopped, it maybe that Earth does not object to our approach.""Or that there is no Earth," said Bliss.
"Do you care to bet this time?" asked Trevize grimly.
"What I think Bliss means," put in Pelorat, "is that Earth may beradioactive as everyone seems to think, and that no one stops us becausethere is no life on the Earth.""No," said Trevize violently. "I'll believe everything that's saidabout Earth, but that. We'll just close in on Earth andsee for ourselves. And I have the feeling we won't be stopped."89The gas giants were well behind. An asteroid beltlay just inside the gas giant nearest the sun. (That gas giant was thelargest and most massive, just as the legends said.)Inside the asteroid belt were four planets.
Trevize studied them carefully. "The third is the largest. The sizeis appropriate and the distance from the sun is appropriate. It couldbe habitable."Pelorat caught what seemed to be a note of uncertainty in Trevize'swords.
He said, "Does it have an atmosphere?""Oh yes," said Trevize. "The second, third, and fourth planets allhave atmospheres. And, as in the old children's tale, the second's istoo dense, the fourth's is not dense enough, but the third's is justright.""Do you think it might be Earth, then?""Think?" said Trevize almost explosively. "I don't have to think. Itis Earth. It has the giant satellite you told me of.""It has?" And Pelorat's face broke into a wider smile than any thatTrevize had ever seen upon it.
"Absolutely! Here, look at it under maximum magnification."Pelorat saw two crescents, one distinctly larger and brighter thanthe other.
"Is that smaller one the satellite?" he asked.
"Yes. It's rather farther from the planet than one might expect butit's definitely revolving about it. It's only the size of a small planet;in fact, it's smaller than any of the four inner planets circling thesun. Still, it's large for a satellite. It's at least two thousandkilometers in diameter, which makes it in the size range of the largesatellites that revolve about gas giants.""No larger?" Pelorat seemed disappointed. "Then it's not a giantsatellite?""Yes, it is. A satellite with a diameter of two to three thousandkilometers that is circling an enormous gas giant is one thing. That samesatellite circling a small, rocky habitable planet is quite another. Thatsatellite has a diameter over a quarter that of Earth. Where have youheard of such near-parity involving a habitable planet?"Pelorat said timidly, "I know very little of such things."Trevize said, "Then take my word for it, Janov. It's unique. We'relooking at something that is practically a double planet, and there arefew habitable planets that have anything more than pebbles orbitingthem. Janov, if you consider that gas giant with its enormous ringsystem in sixth place, and this planet with its enormous satellite inthird both of which your legends told you about, against allcredibility, before you ever saw them then that world you'relooking at must be Earth. It cannot conceivably be anythingelse. We've found it, Janov; we've found it."90THey were on the second day of their coasting progresstoward Earth, and Bliss yawned over the dinner meal. She said, "It seemsto me we've spent more time coasting toward and away from planets thananything else. We've spent weeks at it, literally.""Partly," said Trevize, "that's because Jumps are dangeroustoo close to a star. And in this case, we'removing very slowly because I do not wish to advance into possible dangertoo quickly.""I thought you said you had the feeling we would not be stopped.""So I do, but I don't want to stake everything on a feeling." Trevizelooked at the contents of the spoon before putting it into his mouthand said, "You know, I miss the fish we had on Alpha. We only had threemeals there.""A pity," agreed Pelorat.
"Well," said Bliss, "we visited five worlds and had to leave eachone of them so hurriedly that we never had time to add to our foodsupplies and introduce variety. Even when the world had food to offer,as did Comporellon and Alpha, and, presumably "She did not complete the sentence, for Fallom, looking up quickly,finished it for her. "Solaria? Could you get no food there? There isplenty of food there. As much as on Alpha. And better, too.""I know that, Fallom," said Bliss. "There was just no time."Fallom stared at her solemnly. "Will I ever see Jemby again,Bliss? Tell me the truth."Bliss said, "You may, if we return to Solaria.""Will we ever return to Solaria?"Bliss hesitated. "I cannot say.""Now we go to Earth, is that right? Isn't that the planet where yousay we all originate?""Where our forebears originated," said Bliss.
"I can say `ancestors,'" said Fallom.
"Yes, we are going to Earth."Bliss said lightly, "Wouldn't anyone wish to see the world of theirancestors?""I think there's more to it. You all seem so concerned.""But we've never been there before. We don't know what to expect.""I think it is more than that."Bliss smiled. "You've finished eating, Fallom dear, so why not goto the room and let us have a little serenade on your flute. You'replaying it more beautifully all the time. Come, come." She gave Falloman accelerating pat on the rear end, and off Fallom went, turning onlyonce to give Trevize a thoughtful look.
Trevize looked after her with clear distaste. "Does that thing readminds?""Don't call her a `thing,' Trevize," said Bliss sharply.
"Does she read minds? You ought to be able to tell.""No, she doesn't. Nor can Gaia. Nor can the SecondFoundationers. Reading minds in the sense of overhearing a conversation,or making out precise ideas is not something that can be done now, or inthe foreseeable future. We can detect, interpret, and, to some extent,manipulate emotions, but that is not the same thing at all.""How do you know she can't do this thing that supposedly can't bedone?""Because as you have just said, I ought to be able to tell.""Perhaps she is manipulating you so that you remain ignorant of thefact that she can."Bliss rolled her eyes upward. "Be reasonable, Trevize. Even if she hadunusual abilities, she could do nothing with me for I am not Bliss, I amGaia. You keep forgetting. Do you know the mental inertia representedby an entire planet? Do you think one Isolate, however talented, canovercome that?""You don't know everything, Bliss, so don't be overconfident," saidTrevize sullenly. "That th She has been with us notvery long. I couldn't learn anything but the rudiments of a language inthat time, yet she already speaks Galactic perfectly and with virtuallya full vocabulary. Yes, I know you've been helping her, but I wish youwould stop.""I told you I was helping her, but I also told you she's fearfullyintelligent. Intelligent enough so that I would like to have her part ofGaia. If we can gather her in; if she's still young enough; we might learnenough about the Solarians to absorb that entire world eventually. Itmight well be useful to us.""Does it occur to you that the Solarians are pathological Isolateseven by my standards?""They wouldn't stay so as part of Gaia.""I think you're wrong, Bliss. I think that Solarian child is dangerousand that we should get rid of her.""How? Dump her through the airlock? Kill her, chop her up, and addher to our food supply?"Pelorat said, "Oh, Bliss."And Trevize said, "That's disgusting, and completely uncalled for." Helistened for a moment. The flute was sounding without flaw or waver,and they had been talking in half-whispers. "When this is all over, we'vegot to return her to Solaria, and make sure that Solaria is forever cutoff from the Galaxy. My own feeling is that it should be destroyed. Idistrust and fear it."Bliss thought awhile and said, "Trevize, I know that you have the knackof coming to a right decision, but I also know you have been antipatheticto Fallom from the start. I suspect that may just be because you werehumiliated on Solaria and have taken a violent hatred to the planet andits inhabitants as a result. Since I must not tamper with your mind,I can't tell that for sure. Please remember that if we had not takenFallom with us, we would be on Alpha right now dead and, I presume,buried.""I know that, Bliss, but even so ""And her intelligence is to be admired, not envied.""I do not envy her. I fear her.""Her intelligence?"Trevize licked his lips thoughtfully. "No, not quite.""What, then?""I don't know. Bliss, if I knew what I feared, I might not have tofear it. It's something I don't quite understand." His voice lowered,as though he were speaking to himself. "The Galaxy seems to be crowdedwith things I don't understand. Why did I choose Gaia? Why must I findEarth? Is there a missing assumption in psychohistory? If there is,what is it? And on top of all that, why does Fallom make me uneasy?"Bliss said, "Unfortunately, I can't answer those questions." She rose,and left the room.
Pelorat looked after her, then said, "Surely things aren't totallyblack, Golan. We're getting closer and closer to Earth and once we reachit all mysteries may be solved. And so far nothing seems to be makingany effort to stop us from reaching it."Trevize's eyes flickered toward Pelorat and he said in a low voice,"I wish something would."Pelorat said, "You do? Why should you want that?""Frankly, I'd welcome a sign of life."Pelorat's eyes opened wide. "Have you found that Earth is radioactiveafter all?""Not quite. But it is warm. A bit warmer than I would haveexpected.""Is that bad?""Not necessarily. It may be rather warm but that wouldn't make itnecessarily uninhabitable. The cloud cover is thick and it is definitelywater vapor, so that those clouds, together with a copious water ocean,could tend to keep things livable despite the temperature we calculatedfrom microwave emission. I can't be sure, yet. It's just that ""Yes, Golan?""Well, if Earth were radioactive, that might well account for itsbeing warmer than expected.""But that doesn't argue the reverse, does it? If it's warmer thanexpected, that doesn't mean it must be radioactive.""No. No, it doesn't." Trevize managed to force a smile. "No usebrooding, Janov. In a day or two, I'll be able to tell more about itand we'll know for sure."91Fallom was sitting on the cot in deep thought whenBliss came into the room. Fallom looked up briefly, then down again.
Bliss said quietly, "What's the matter, Fallom?"Fallom said, "Why does Trevize dislike me so much, Bliss?""What makes you think he dislikes you.""He looks at me impatiently Is that the word?""It might be the word.""He looks at me impatiently when I am near him. His face always twistsa little.""Trevize is having a hard time, Fallom.""Because he's looking for Earth?""Yes."Fallom thought awhile, then said, "He is particularly impatient whenI think something into moving."Bliss's lips tightened. "Now, Fallom, didn't I tell you you must notdo that, especially when Trevize is present?""Well, it was yesterday, right here in this room, and he was in thedoorway and I didn't notice. I didn't know he was watching. It was justone of Pel's book-films, anyway, and I was trying to make it stand onone tip. I wasn't doing any harm.""It makes him nervous, Fallom, and I want you not to do it, whetherhe's watching or not.""Does it make him nervous because he can't do it?""Perhaps.""Can you do it?"Bliss shook her head slowly. "No, I can't.""It doesn't make you nervous when I do it. It doesn't make Pel nervous,either.""People are different.""I know," said Fallom, with a sudden hardness that surprised Blissand caused her to frown.
"What do you know, Fallom?"" I'm different.""Of course, I just said so. People are different.""My shape is different. I can move things.""That's true."Fallom said, with a shade of rebelliousness, "I must move things. Trevize should not be angry with me for that, and you shouldnot stop me.""But why must you move things?""It is practice. Exerceez. Is that the right word?""Not quite. Exercise.""Yes. Jemby always said I must train my my ""Transducer-lobes?""Yes. And make them strong. Then, when I was grown up, I could powerall the robots. Even Jemby.""Fallom, who did power all the robots if you did not?""Bander." Fallom said it very matter-of-factly.
"Did you know Bander?""Of course. I viewed him many times. I was to be the nextestate-head. The Bander estate would become the Fallom estate. Jembytold me so.""You mean Bander came to your "Fallom's mouth made a perfect O of shock. She said in a choked voice,"Bander would never come to " The youngster ran out of breath andpanted a bit, then said, "I viewed Bander's image."Bliss asked hesitantly, "How did Bander treat you?"Fallom looked at Bliss with a faintly puzzled eye. "Bander would askme if I needed anything; if I was comfortable. But Jemby was always nearme so I never needed anything and I was always comfortable."Her head bent and she stared at the floor. Then she placed her handsover her eyes and said, "But Jemby stopped. I think it was because Banderstopped, too."Bliss said, "Why do you say that?""I've been thinking about it. Bander powered all the robots, and ifJemby stopped, and all the other robots, too, it must be that Banderstopped. Isn't that so?"Bliss was silent.
Fallom said, "But when you take me back to Solaria I will power Jembyand all the rest of the robots, and I will be happy again."She was sobbing.
Bliss said, "Aren't you happy with us, Fallom? Just alittle? Sometimes?"Fallom lifted her tear-stained face to Bliss and her voice trembledas she shook her head and said, "I want Jemby."In an agony of sympathy, Bliss threw her arms about the youngster. "Oh,Fallom, how I wish I could bring you and Jemby together again," and wassuddenly aware that she was weeping, too.
92Pelorat entered and found them so. He halted in mid-stepand said, "What's the matter?"Bliss detached herself and fumbled for a small tissue so that shemight wipe her eyes. She shook her head, and Pelorat at once said,with heightened concern, "But what's the matter ?"Bliss said, "Fallom, just rest a little. I'll think of something tomake things a little better for you. Remember I love you just thesame way that Jemby did."She seized Pelorat's elbow and rushed him out into the living room,saying, "It's nothing, Pel. Nothing.""It's Fallom, though, isn't it? She still misses Jemby.""Terribly. And there's nothing we can do about it. I can tell herthat I love her and, truthfully, I do. How can you help loving achild so intelligent and gentle? Fearfully intelligent. Trevizethinks too intelligent. She's seen Bander in her time,you know or viewed it, rather, as a holographic image. She's notmoved by that memory, however; she's very cold and matter-of-fact aboutit, and I can understand why. There was only the fact that Bander wasowner of the estate and that Fallom would be the next owner that boundthem. No other relationship at all.""Does Fallom understand that Bander is her father?""Her mother . If we agree that Fallom is to be regardedas feminine, so is Bander.""Either way, Bliss dear. Is Fallom aware of the parentalrelationship?""I don't know that she would understand what that is. She may, ofcourse, but she gave no hint. However, Pel, she has reasoned out thatBander is dead, for it's dawned on her that Jemby's inactivation must bethe result of power loss and since Bander supplied the power Thatfrightens me."Pelorat said thoughtfully, "Why should it, Bliss? It's only a logicalinference, after all.""Another logical inference can be drawn from that death. Deathsmust be few and far distant on Solaria with its long-lived and isolatedSpacers. Experience of natural death must be a limited one for any ofthem, and probably absent altogether for a Solarian child of Fallom'sage. If Fallom continues to think of Bander's death, she's going to beginto wonder why Bander died, and the fact that it happenedwhen we strangers were on the planet will surely lead her to the obviouscause and effect.""That we killed Bander?""It wasn't we who killed Bander, Pel. It was I .""She couldn't guess that.""But I would have to tell her that. She is annoyed with Trevize as itis, and he is clearly the leader of the expedition. She would take itfor granted that it would be he who would have brought about the deathof Bander, and how could I allow Trevize to bear the blame unjustly?""What would it matter, Bliss? The child feels nothing for herfath mother. Only for her robot, Jemby.""But the death of the mother meant the death of her robot, too. Ialmost did own up to my responsibility. I was strongly tempted.""Why?""So I could explain it my way. So I could soothe her, forestall herown discovery of the fact in a reasoning process that would work it outin a way that would offer no justification for it.""But there was justification. It was self-defense. Ina moment, we all would have been dead, if you had not acted.""It's what I would have said, but I could not bring myself toexplain. I was afraid she wouldn't believe me."Pelorat shook his head. He said, sighing, "Do you suppose it mighthave been better if we had not brought her? The situation makes youso unhappy.""No," said Bliss angrily, "don't say that. It would have mademe infinitely more unhappy to have to sit here right now and rememberthat we had left an innocent child behind to be slaughtered mercilesslybecause of what we had done.""It's the way of Fallom's world.""Now, Pel, don't fall into Trevize's way of thinking. Isolatesfind it possible to accept such things and think no more about it. Theway of Gaia is to save life, however, not destroy it or to sitidly by while it is destroyed. Life of all kinds must, we all know,constantly be coming to an end in order that other life might endure,but never uselessly, never to no end. Bander's death, though unavoidable,is hard enough to bear; Fallom's would have been past all bounds.""Ah well," said Pelorat, "I suppose you're right. And in anycase, it is not the problem of Fallom concerning which I've come to seeyou. It's Trevize.""What about Trevize?""Bliss, I'm worried about him. He's waiting to determine the factsabout Earth, and I'm not sure he can withstand the strain.""I don't fear for him. I suspect he has a sturdy and stable mind.""We all have our limits. Listen, the planet Earth is warmer than heexpected it to be; he told me so. I suspect that he thinks it may be toowarm for life, though he's clearly trying to talk himself into believingthat's not so.""Maybe he's right. Maybe it's not too warm for life.""Also, he admits it's possible that the warmth might possibly arisefrom a radioactive crust, but he is refusing to believe that also. -Ina day or two, we'll be close enough so that the truth of the matter willbe unmistakable. What if Earth is radioactive?""Then he'll have to accept the fact.""But I don't know how to say this, or how to put it in mentalterms. What if his mind "Bliss waited, then said wryly, "Blows a fuse?""Yes. Blows a fuse. Shouldn't you do something now to strengthenhim? Keep him level and under control, so to speak?""No, Pel. I can't believe he's that fragile, and there is a firmGaian decision that his mind must not be tampered with.""But that's the very point. He has this unusual `rightness,' orwhatever you want to call it. The shock of his entire project fallingto nothingness at the moment when it seems successfully concluded maynot destroy his brain, but it may destroy his `rightness.' It's a veryunusual property he has. Might it not be unusually fragile, too?"Bliss remained for a moment in thought. Then she shrugged. "Well,perhaps I'll keep an eye on him."93For the next thirty-six hours, Trevize was vaguelyaware that Bliss and, to a lesser degree, Pelorat, tended to dog hisfootsteps. Still, that was not utterly unusual in a ship as compact astheirs, and he had other things on his mind.
Now, as he sat at the computer, he was aware of them standing justinside the doorway. He looked up at them, his face blank.
"Well?" he said, in a very quiet voice.
Pelorat said, rather awkwardly, "How are you, Golan?"Trevize said, "Ask Bliss. She's been staring at me intently forhours. She must be poking through my mind. Aren't you, Bliss?""No, I am not," said Bliss evenly, "but if you feel the need for myhelp, I can try. Do you want my help?""No, why should I? Leave me alone. Both of you."Pelorat said, "Please tell us what's going on.""Guess!""Is Earth ""Yes, it is. What everyone insisted on telling us is perfectlytrue." Trevize gestured at the viewscreen, where Earth presented itsnightside and was eclipsing the sun. It was a solid circle of blackagainst the starry sky, its circumference outlined by a broken orangecurve.
Pelorat said, "Is that orange the radioactivity?""No. Just refracted sunlight through the atmosphere. It would bea solid orange circle if the atmosphere weren't so cloudy. We can'tsee the radioactivity. The various radiations, even the gamma rays, areabsorbed by the atmosphere. However, they do set up secondary radiations,comparatively feeble ones, but the computer can detect them. They'restill invisible to the eye, but the computer can produce a photon ofvisible light for each particle or wave of radiation it receives andput Earth into false color. Look."And the black circle glowed with a faint, blotchy blue.
"How much radioactivity is there?" asked Bliss, in a low voice. "Enoughto signify that no human life can exist there?""No life of any kind," said Trevize. "The planet is uninhabitable. Thelast bacterium, the last virus, is long gone.""Can we explore it?" said Pelorat. "I mean, in space suits.""For a few hours before we come down with irreversible radiationsickness.""Then what do we do, Golan?""Do?" Trevize looked at Pelorat with that same expressionlessface. "Do you know what I would like to do? I would like to take youand Bliss and the child back to Gaia and leave you allthere forever. Then I would like to go back to Terminus and hand backthe ship. Then I would like to resign from the Council, which ought tomake Mayor Branno very happy. Then I would like to live on my pensionand let the Galaxy go as it will. I won't care about the Seldon Plan, orabout the Foundation, or about the Second Foundation, or about Gaia. TheGalaxy can choose its own path. It will last my time and why should Icare a snap as to what happens afterward?""Surely, you don't mean it, Golan," said Pelorat urgently.
Trevize stared at him for a while, and then he drew a long breath. "No,I don't, but, oh, how I wish I could do exactly what I have just outlinedto you.""Never mind that. What will you do?""Keep the ship in orbit about the Earth, rest, get over the shock ofall this, and think of what to do next. Except that ""Yes?"And Trevize blurted out, "What can I do next? What is there furtherto look for? What is there further to find?"
第七部 地球 第十九章 放射性之谜
　　85
远星号静静起飞，在大气层中缓缓爬升，将那座黑暗的岛屿越抛越远。下方几许微弱的光点越来越暗，终至完全消失无踪。随着高度的增加，大气逐渐稀薄，太空艇的速度逐渐加快，天上的光点则越来越多、越来越后。
最后，当他们往下望去，这颗名叫阿尔发的行星只剩一弯新月形的光辉，其上缭绕着众多云气。
裴洛拉特说：“我想他们没有实用的太空科技，他们无法追赶我们。”
“我不确定这件事能让我释怀多少，”崔维兹看来郁郁寡欢，声音听来相当沮丧。“我被感染了。”
“但完全没发作。”宝绮思说。
“然而他们有办法触发。那究竟是什么办法？”
宝绮思耸了耸肩。“广子说如果病毒一直不发作，最后会死在它们无法适应的身体里面——例如你的身体。”
“是吗？”崔维兹气冲冲地说：“她怎么知道？话又说回来，我怎么知道广子说的不是自我安慰的谎言？而且不论触发的方法是什么，难道不可能自然发生吗？某种特殊的化学药剂，某种放射性，某种……某种……谁知道是什么？我可能突然发病，然后你们三人也会死掉。若是在我们抵达人口众多的世界后才发作，也许会引起恶性的大型流行疾病，逃离的难民还会把它们带到其他世界。”
他盯着宝绮思说：“你有没有什么办法对付它们？”
宝绮思缓缓摇了摇头。“不太容易。盖娅也拥有寄生物的成分——微生物、虫类等等，它们对生态平衡有正面意义。这些生存在盖娅上的寄生物，对世界级意识都有一己的贡献，可是绝不过度繁殖，因此它们的存在不会造成显着的危害。问题是，崔维兹，侵犯你的病毒并非盖娅的一部分。”
“你说‘不太容易’，”崔维兹皱着眉说：“在如今这种情况下，即使可能非常困难，能不能也麻烦你试试看？你能不能找出病毒在我体内的位置，然后将它们消灭？若是你做不到，能不能至少增强我的抵抗力？”
“你可了解自己在做什么要求，崔维兹？我不熟悉你体内的微观生物，或许不易分辨何者是你细胞内的病毒，何者又是正常的基因。而要区分何者是你身体已经适应的病毒；何者又是广子感染给你的，则更加困难。我会试一试，崔维兹，不过需要花些时间，而且不一定成功。”
“慢慢来，”崔维兹说：“伹一定要试。”
“当然。”宝绮思答道。
裴洛拉特说：“假如广子说的是实话，宝绮思，你也许会发现那些病毒的活力已渐渐减弱，而你可以加速它们的衰亡。”
“我可以试试看，”宝绮思说：“这是个不错的主意。”
“你不会心软？”崔维兹说：“杀死那些病毒，就等于毁灭许多珍贵的生命，你知道的。”
“你是在讽刺我，崔维兹。”宝绮思毫不动容地说：“然而，不管是不是讽刺，你指出了一个真正的难处。话说回来，在你和病毒之间，我很难不优先考虑你。如果有可能，我一定会杀死它们，你不用怕。毕竟，就算我没考虑到你，”她的嘴角牵动一下，彷佛强忍住笑意。“裴洛拉特和菲龙也有危险。跟你栢较之下，我对他们两人的感情你应该比较有信心。你甚至应该想到，现在我自己也有危险。”
“你对自己的爱我可没有信心，”崔维兹喃喃说道：“为了某种高尚的动机，你随时愿意牺牲自己的性命。不过，我倒相信你真心关怀裴洛拉特。”
然后他又说：“我没听见菲龙的笛声，她有什么不对劲吗？”
“没事，”宝绮思说：“她睡着了——是自然的睡眠，跟我完全没有关系。而我建议，等你向那颗我们心目中的地球之阳跃迁后，我们也都好好睡一觉。我极需要睡眠，我认为你也一样，崔维兹。”
“好的，要是我做得到的话——你知道吗，宝绮思，你说对了。”
“说对了什么，崔维兹？”
“对于孤立体的见解。新地球并非天堂，不论它看起来多么像。最初那些殴劲款待——那些表面的友善——都是为了解除我们的警戒，以便将病毒传染给我们其中一人。而其后的殷勤款待，那些各种名目的庆祝活动，目的是把我们留下，等候渔船队归来，然后就能让病毒发作。多亏菲龙和她的音乐，否则险些就让他们得逞，这点你可能也对了。”
“关于菲龙？”
“是的，当初我不愿带她同行，我也始终不高兴看到她在太空船上。由于你的关系，宝绮思，她才会跟我们在一起，又由于她无意间的举动，我们才会侥幸得救。不过——”
“不过什么？”
“尽避如此，我对菲龙的存在仍感不安，我也说不出所以然来。”
“我这样说你也许会感到舒服点，崔维兹，我不确定是否应将功劳全归菲龙。广子做出阿尔发人必定视为叛逆的行为，菲龙的音乐只不过是她的借口，甚趾蟋她自己可能也相信了。但除此之外，她还另有心事，我隐约侦测得到，却无法确定它的本质，也许她羞于让这件事浮出意识层面。我有一种感觉，她对你有特殊好感，不愿眼睁睁看你死去，这和菲龙以及她的音乐无关。”
“你真这么认为？”崔维兹浅浅一笑。这是离开阿尔发后，他露出的第一个笑容。
“我的确这么认为。对于和女人打交道，你一定很有两下子。在康普隆，你说服了李札乐部长让我们驾着太空船离开，这回又促使广子拯救我们的性命，所以功劳其实应该属于你。”
崔维兹的笑容扩大了些。“好吧，既然你这么说——现在，向地球前进。”他踏着几乎可算轻快的步伐，转身走进驾驶舱。
裴洛拉特没有跟过去，他对宝绮思说：“你终究还是安抚了他，对不对，宝绮思？”
“没有，裴，我从未碰触他的心灵。”
“你刚才极力满足他的男性虚荣心，当然触及了他的心灵深处。”
“全然是间接的。”宝绮思微笑说道。
“即使如此，还是谢谢你，宝绮思。”
86
跃迁之后，那颗可能是地球之阳的恒星仍在十分之一秒差距外。它的后度已远超过星空中其他天体，然而看来依旧只是一颗星。
崔维兹面色凝着地研究这颗恒星。为了便于观察，他将光线过滤了一遍。
他说：“跟新地球环绕的阿尔发星比较之下，它们无疑可算孪生兄弟。但阿尔发收录在电脑舆图中，而这颗恒星却没有。我们不知道它的名字，也没有它的统计资料，即使它有个行星系，相关资料也全然阙如。”
裴洛拉特说：“假如地球果真环绕这个太阳，这不正是我们意料中的事？完全找不到任何资料，正好符合了地球资料几乎全被销毁的事实。”
“没错，伹也可能表示它是个外世界，只是未列在梅尔波美尼亚那座建筑的墙上，我们无法确定那份名单绝对完整无缺。此外还有一个可能，就是这颗恒星或许没有任何行星，因此不值得收录在主要用于军事和贸易的电脑舆圆中——詹诺夫，有没有任何的传说，提到地球之阳和它变的孪生兄弟距离大约只有一秒差距？”
裴洛拉特摇了摇头。“对不起，葛兰，我想不起有这样的传说。不过，说不定有，我的记性不大好，我会去查查看。”
“这不着要，地球之阳有没有什么名字？”
“有好些不同的名称，我猜不同的语言都有不同的称呼。”
“我常常忘记地球上曾经有许多种语言。”
“一定是这样。唯有如此，众多的传说才能有个合理的解释。”
崔维兹没好气地说：“好啦，现在我们该怎么办？在这么远的距离，我们根本观察不到行星系，我们得靠近点才行。我希望能谨慎行事，可是谨慎有时也会过了头，变得毫无道理。直到目前为止，我看不出有什么危险。不论对方是何方神圣，既然他们有力量将银河中的地球资料一扫而光，那么，只要他们不希望被人发现，即使隔着这么远的距离，他们一定也能轻易将我们消灭，但我们现在什么事也没有。如果只是担心靠近些会发生什么变故就永远待在这里，那绝不是理智的做法，对不对？”
宝绮思说：“我想，电脑没侦测到可解释成危险的任何迹象。”
“我说看不出有什么危险时，根据的是电脑的观测结果。我当然无法以肉眼看到任何东西，我也没那么指望。”
“那么，我想你现在只是在寻求支持，要大家共同做出一个你认为是危险的决定。好吧，我支持你。我们飞了这么远的路途，总不能无缘无故就掉头离去，对不对？”
“没错。”崔维兹道：“你怎么说，裴洛拉特？”
裴洛拉特说：“我愿意继续前进，即使只是为了满足好奇心。要是就这么空手而归，不知道是否找到了地球，那简直令人无法忍受。”
“好，那么，我们都同意了。”崔维兹说。
“还没有，”裴洛拉特说：“还有菲龙。”
崔维兹看来吃了一惊。“你的意思是要我们跟那孩子商量？即使她真有什么意见，会有什么价值？何况她一心只想回到她自己的世界。”
“这点你能怪她吗？”宝绮思为菲龙辩护道。
直到他们谈起菲龙，崔维兹才察觉到她的笛声，现在她吹的是激昂的进行曲。
“听听看，”他说：“不知她在哪里听过进行曲？”
“大概是健比用笛子吹给她听过。”
崔维兹摇了摇头。“我不大相信，舞曲、催眠曲之类还比较有可能——听我说，菲龙令我感到很不自在，她学得太快了。”
“是我帮她的，”宝绮思说：“记住这一点。她不但非常聪明，而且跟我们在一起的这段期间，她受到非比寻常的知性刺激，新的感受源源不绝涌人她的心灵。她目睹了太空的景观，造访了不同的世界，又见到许多人，这都是她前所未有的经验。”
菲龙的进行曲变得越来越狂放，也越来越粗野。
崔维兹叹了一口气。“好啦，她已经表达了意见。她的音乐似乎透露出乐观的精神，并对冒险充满向往，我想这就代表她赞成我们继续接近地球。所以说，让我们小心翼翼地行动，对这个太阳的行星系仔绌观察一番。”
“假如有的话。”宝绮思说。
崔维兹淡淡一笑。“它一定有个行星系。我跟你打赌，看你要赌多少。”
87
“你输了。”崔维兹漫下经心地说：“你刚才决定赌多少？”
“根本没有，我从没说过要跟你打赌。”宝绮思答道。
“没关系，反正我也不会要你的钱。”
现在他们距离那个太阳大约一百亿公里，它看来虽然仍是个光点，但已显得分外明后。比较之下，从一般可住人行星表面观察本身的太阳，其平均后度约为目前这个太阳的四千倍。
“现在，影像经过放大后，我们可以看到两颗行星。”崔维兹说：“从它们直径的测量值以及反射光的光谱研判，它们显然是气态巨行星。”
88
太空艇目前距离行星轨道面很远。宝绮思与裴洛拉特站在崔维兹身后，凝视着显像屏幕。他们看到的是两个泛着绿光的微小新月形，其中较小的那个“行星相”比较大。
崔维兹说：“詹诺夫！地球之阳应该有四颗气态巨行星，没错吧。”
“不寻常。”崔维兹说：“虽然每颗气态巨行星几乎都有‘碴环’，但它们通常相当暗淡狭窄。我曾见过明后、细小的行星环，却从未见到过像这样的，也从没听说过。”
裴洛拉特说：“这显然就是传说中提到的，那颗拥有行星环的巨行星。如果这真是唯一的……”
“真是唯一的，据我所知没有第二颗，甚至电脑也这么认为。”崔维兹说。
“那么这必定就是拥有地球的行星系。当然没人能虚构出这样的行星，一定要亲眼目睹，才有办法描述出来。”
崔维兹说：“现在不论你的传说怎么讲，我都愿意照单全收。这应该是第六颗行星，而地球是第三颗？”
“是的，葛兰。”
“那么我敢说，我们现在距离地球不到十五亿公里，而我们至今未被挡驾。当初我们接近盖娅时，在半途就遭到拦阻。”
宝绮思说：“你们被拦阻的时候，距离盖娅已经很近了。”
“啊，”崔维兹说：“不过我一向认为地球比盖娅强大，因此我想这是个好现象。既然我们没有遭到拦阻，也许代表地球不反对我们造访。”
“或者根本没有地球。”宝绮思说。
“这次你有兴趣打赌吗？”崔维兹绷着脸说。
“我想宝绮思的意思是说，”裴洛拉特插嘴道：“地球也许真有放射性，就像大家几乎一致相信的那样，而没人出来拦阻我们，是因为地球上根本没有生命。”
“不可能。”崔维兹以激动的口气说：安“我愿意相信有关地球的每一个传说，唯独这点例外。我们一定要迫近地球，亲自看个清楚。而且我有个预感，我们不会遭到拦阻。”
89
气态巨行星皆已被远远抛在后面，在最靠近太阳的气态巨行星内围（诚如传说所言，这颗巨行星的体积与质量都是最大的），出现了一条小行星带。
小行星带之内，总共有四颗行星。
此时，崔维兹正在仔细研究这些行星。“第三颗行星最大。它的体积适中、和太阳的距离适中，应该是个可住人行星。”
从崔维兹的话中，裴洛拉特捕捉到一丝不确定的语气。
他问：“它有大气层吗？”
“喔，有的。”崔维兹说：“第二、第三和第四颗行星都有大气层。而且，就像古老的儿童故事一样，第二颗的大气太浓，第四颗的又太稀，只有第三颗的大气恰到好处。”
“那么，你认为它可能是地球吗？”
“认为？”崔维兹几乎是大声吼了出来。“我不必认为，它就是地球，它拥有你说的那个巨型卫星。”
“有吗？”裴洛拉特露出难得的笑容，崔维兹从未见过他笑得那么开心。
“正是如此！来，看看最高倍率的放大影像。”
裴洛拉特看到两个新月形，其中一个显然较大，而且较为明后。
“较小的那颗是卫星吗？”他问。
“是的，它和那颗行星的距离比想像中要远，可是它的确环绕着那颗行星。它的体积相当于小型行星，事实上，它比四颗内行星都要小。话说回来，就卫星的标准而言，它实在太大了些。它的直径至少有两千公里，和气态巨行星的卫星差不多大。”
“不是更大？”裴洛拉特似乎有些失望，“那它就不能算巨型卫星。”
“不，它的确是。环绕巨大气态巨行星的卫星，直径两、三千公里没什么稀奇，而同样大小的卫星环绕一颗小型、岩质的可住人行星，则完全另当别论。那颗卫星的直径是地球直径的四分之一强，你在哪里听说过，可住人行星有这种同量级的卫星？”
裴洛拉特怯生生地说：“这方面我知道得很少。”
崔维兹说：“那就相信我，詹诺夫，它是银河中独一无二的。我们现在看到的其实可算一对行星，而通常在可住人行星的轨道上，却鲜有超过鹅卵石大小的天体。詹诺夫，想想看，第六颗是拥有巨大行星环的气态巨行星，第三颗又是拥有巨大卫星的行星——虽然亲眼目睹之前难以置信，但两者都跟你熟知的传说相符——如此，你眼前这颗行星一定就是地球，它不可能是别的世界。我们找到它了，詹诺夫，我们找到它了！”
90
他们缓缓向地球前进，如今已进入第二天。晚餐的时候，宝绮思频频打呵欠。她说：“我感到这些日子以来，我们大部分时间都在行星问飞来飞去。事实上，我们已经花了好几个星期。”
“有一部分原因，”崔维兹说：“是距离恒星如果太近，进行跃迁会很危险。而这一次，我们故意将速度放得非常慢，是因为我不想太快冲进可能的危险中。”
“我记得你说过你有一种预感，认定我们不会遭到拦阻。”
“的确如此，可是我不要将一切押在感觉上。”崔维兹凝视着汤匙中的食物，没有立刻放进嘴里。“你们知道吗，我很怀念阿尔发的渔产，我们在那里只吃了三顿而已。”
“实在可惜。”裴洛拉特表示同意。
“是啊，”宝绮思说：“我们总共造访了五个世界，每一次都是落荒而逃，从没有机会补充些食物，换点新鲜的口味。即使在愿意供应食物的世界上，例如康普隆和阿尔发，我们也根本就没机会，想必在……”
宝绮思的话没有说完，因为菲龙立刻抬起头来，把她的话接下去。“索拉利？你们在那里不能得到食物吗？那里有很多食物，就像在阿尔发上一样多，而且品质更好。”
“这点我知道，菲龙，”宝绮思说：“只是时间来不及。”
菲龙面色凝着地瞪着她。“我会不会再见到健比，宝绮思？告诉我实话。”
宝绮思说：“会的，如果我们回到索拉利的话。”
“我们会不会回索拉利呢？”
宝绮思迟疑了一下。“我不敢说。”
“现在我们要到地球去是吗？是不是你说过的那个我们都源自那里的行星？”
“我们的先人源自那里。”宝绮思说。
“我会说祖先了。”菲龙说。
“对，我们正要去地球。”
“为什么？”
宝绮思随口答道：“谁不希望看看自己祖先的世界呢？”
“我觉得还有别的原因，你们似乎都很担心。”
“我们从没去过那里，不知道会遇到些什么。”
“我觉得还不只这样。”
宝绮思微笑着说：“你已经吃完了，亲爱的菲龙，何不回到舱房去，让我们欣赏一段笛子奏出的小夜曲，你的演奏越来越美妙了。去吧，去。”她在菲龙屁股上轻轻拍了一下，催促她赶紧离去。菲龙乖乖走开，途中还回过头来，若有所思地看了崔维兹一眼。
崔维兹望着她的背影，露出明显的嫌恶表情。“那小东西会读心术吗？”
“别叫她‘东西’，崔维兹。”宝绮思以严厉的口吻说。
“她会读心术吗？你应该能判断。”
“不，她不会，盖娅和第二基地人也不会。如果将读心解释为偷听一段心灵谈话，或是获悉他人明确的概念，那么目前没有人做得到，在可预见的将来也不可能。我们能侦测、诠释情感，在某种秤谌上也能操纵情感，但这完全是另一回事。”
“理论上无法做到的事，你怎么知道她一定做不到？”
“因为正如你刚才说的，我应该判断得出来。”
“或许是她控制了你，所以你对事实一直浑然不觉。”
宝绮思白了他一眼。“你要讲理，崔维兹。即使她具有不寻常的能力，她也对我莫可奈何，因为我不只是宝绮思，我还是盖娅，你始终记不住这点。你知道整个行星的精神惯性有多大吗？你以为一个孤立体，不论多么能干，就能摇撼整个行星吗？”
“你不是万事通，宝绮思，所以不要过分自信。”崔维兹语气阴沉地说：“那个小东——她跟我们在一起没多久，这么短的时间内，我顶多只能学到一种语言的皮毛，她竟然已经能说流利的银河标准语，还几乎掌握了所有的词汇。没错，我知道你一直在帮助她，伹我希望你适可而止。”
“我跟你说过我在帮她，但我也说过她聪明得吓人，以致使我希望她能成为盖娅的一部分。假如我们能吸收她，假如她尚未超龄，我们也许可藉着她了解索拉利人，从而将那整个世界吸收进来，这样做当然对我们有很大的肋益。”
“你有没有想到过，即使就我的标准而言，索拉利人也是病态的孤立体？”
“变成盖娅的一部分，它们就会改头换面。”
“我认为你错了，宝绮思。我认为那个索拉利儿童是个危险人物，我们应该做个了断。”
“怎么做？将她从气闸抛出去？杀了她，把她剁碎，然后给我们加菜？”
裴洛拉特说：“喔，宝绮思。”
崔维兹则说：“真晒心，实在太过分了。”由于笛声早已响起，他们一直以接近耳语的音量交谈。崔维兹默默听了一会儿，笛声完全没有任何破绽或犹豫。“等一切结束后，我们一定要将她送回索拉利，还要确保索拉利和银河永远隔离。我个人的感觉是应该将它毁灭，我对它既不信任又感到恐惧。”
宝绮思想了一下，然后说：“崔维兹，我知道你有一项特殊本领，能做出正确的抉择，但我也知道，打从一开始你就十分厌恶菲龙。我猜也许只是因为你在索拉利遭到了羞辱，因此对那颗行星和其上居民怀有深切的恨意。由于我绝不能干扰你的心灵，我无法百分之百确定这点。但请别忘了，假如我们未带菲龙同行，我们如今仍缓篝在阿尔发——成了死尸，而且已经被埋掉了。”
“这点我知道，宝绮思，伹即使这样……”
“她的智慧应该受到赞赏，而不是妒嫉。”
“我并不妒嫉她，我怕她。”
“怕她的智慧？”
崔维兹若有所思地舔了舔嘴唇。“不，并不尽然。”
“不然怕什么？”
“我不知道，宝绮思。如果我知道，我也许就不必怕了，可是我不太清楚自己为什么害怕。”他的声音压得更低，彷佛在自言自语。“银河中似乎充满我不了解的事物。为什么我要选择盖娅？为什么我必须找到地球？心理史学有一项遗漏的假设吗？倘若真有的话，那又是什么？而最令人费解的一点，是菲龙为何令我坐立不安？”
宝绮思说：“不幸我无法回答这些问题。”说完她就起身离去。
裴洛拉特望了望她的背影，然后说：“不会事事不如人意的，葛兰。我们离地球越来越近，一旦我们抵达地球，所有的迷团将迎刀而解。目前为止，似乎没有任何力量企图阻止我们前进。”
崔维兹对裴洛拉特猛眨眼睛，同时低声说：“我倒希望有。”
裴洛拉特说：“是吗？你为何这么希望？”
“坦白说，我乐意看到生命迹象。”
裴洛拉特双眼睁得老大。“你发现地球具有放射性了？”
“并不尽然。不过它的表面温热，比我预期的温度高一点。”
“这样很糟吗？”
“不一定，它的温度可能较高，但并不代表一定不可住人。它有很厚的云层，成分绝对是水蒸气，所以说，虽然我们从微波发射计算出的温度偏高，那些云气，连同丰沛的普通海洋，仍然可以维持生命。我还不能肯定，不过——”
“怎样，葛兰？”
“嗯，假如地球真有放射性，那就能解释它的温度为何比预期的高。”
“可是这种推论不能反过来，对不对？如果它的温度比预期的高一点，不一定表示它就具有放射性。”
“没错，没错，并不成立。”崔维兹勉强挤出一丝笑容，“光用想的什么用处，詹诺夫。再过一两天，我就能得到更多资料，到时我们就能确定了。”
91
宝绮思走进舱房的时候，菲龙正坐在便床上沉思。发现宝绮思进来，菲龙只抬头看了一眼，立刻又低下头去。
宝绮思平静地说：“怎么了，菲龙？”
菲龙答道：“为什么崔维兹那么讨厌我，宝绮思？”
“你为什么认为他讨厌你？”
“当我接近他的时候，他会用不耐烦的眼光——是不是该说不耐烦？”
“也许是吧。”
“他会用不耐烦的眼光看着我，而且他的脸孔总是微微扭曲。”
“崔维兹承受的压力很大，菲龙。”
“因为他在寻找地球？”
“对。”
菲龙想了一会儿，说：“当我想让什么东西动的时候，他就特别不耐烦。”
宝绮思噘了噘嘴。“喂，菲龙，难道我没告诉过你绝对不能那样做，尤其是崔维兹在场的时候？”
“嗯，可是昨天，就在这间舱房里，他站在门口，我没注意到，我不知道他正在盯着我。那只不过是裴的一支胶卷书，我试着要让它站起来，我没有做任何危险的事。”
“那缓箢他神经紧张，菲龙，我要你以后别再做那种事，不管崔维兹有没有看到。”
“是不是他自己做不到，所以会神经紧张？”
“大概吧。”
“你做得到吗？”
宝绮思缓缓摇了摇头。“不，我不能。”
“我那样做的时候，不缓箢你感到紧张，也不缓箢裴感到紧张。”
“每个人都不一样。”
“我知道了。”菲龙突然改用强硬的语气。宝绮思吓了一跳，不禁皱起眉头。
“你知道什么，菲龙？”
“我不一样。”
“当然，我刚才说过，每个人都不一样。”
“我的形体不一样，我还可以让东西运动。”
“这是事实。”
菲龙带着叛逆的口吻说：“我一定要让东西运动，崔维兹不该生我的气，你也不该阻止我。”
“可是你为什么一定要这样做呢？”
“这是练习，是磨练——这样说对吗？”
“不完全对，应该说锻链。”
“对，健比总是说，我必须训练我的……我的……”
“转换叶突？”
“对，使它们越来越强壮。然后，等我长大了，我就能驱动所有的机器人，甚至包括健比。”
“菲龙，在你还没这样做的时候，由谁来驱动所有的机器人？”
“班德。”菲龙随口答道。
“你认识班德？”
“当然，我跟他见过许多面。我是下一任的属地领主，班德属地将来会变成菲龙属地，健比这样告诉我的。”
“你是说班德来到你……”
菲龙吃了一惊，嘴巴张成一个完美的椭圆。她像是被人掐住脖子一样，吃力地说：“班德从来不会到……”她一口气没接上，喘了喘才继续说：“我看到的是班德的影像。”
宝绮思以迟疑的口吻问道：“班德待你怎么样？”
菲龙用稍带困惑的眼光望着宝绮思。“班德总是问我是否需要什么，是否感到舒适。可是健比一直在我身边，所以我从不需要任何东西，也始终感到很舒适。”
她垂下头来，凝视着地板，然后用双手蒙住眼睛，又说：“可是健比不动了，我想那是因为班德——也不动了。”
宝绮思问道：“你为什么这样说？”
“我一直在想这件事。班德负责驱动所有的机器人，如果健比不动了，其他的机器人也都不动了，那一定是因为班德下动了。是不是这样？”
宝绮思哑口无言。
菲龙说：“不过等你带我回索拉利后，我就会驱动健比和其他所有的机器人，到时候我又会快乐了。”
说完她哭了起来。
宝绮思说：“跟我们在一起你觉得不快乐吗，菲龙？哪怕只是一点点？偶尔一下子？”
菲龙拾起头，沾满泪水的脸孔正对着宝绮思。她一面摇头，一面以颤抖的声音说：“我要健比。”
宝绮思心中顿生一股强烈的同情，她伸出双臂将孩子抱在怀中。“喔，菲龙，我多么希望能让你和健比团圆。”她突然发觉自己也在流泪。
92
裴洛拉特走进来，看到两人哭成一团。他猛然停下脚步问道：“怎么回事？”
宝绮思轻轻推开菲龙，想要摸出一小张面纸擦乾眼泪。她才摇了摇头，裴洛拉特立刻以加倍关切的语气问：“究竟是怎么回事？”
宝绮思说：“菲龙，稍微休息一下，我会想想办法，让你感觉好过一点。记住，我和健比一样爱你。”
她抓住裴洛拉特的手肘，将他拉到起居舱中。“没事，裴——没什么事。”
“不过菲龙有问题，对不对？她仍想念健比。”
“想念得很厉害，而我们根本帮不上忙。我可以告诉她我爱她——我真的很爱她。这么聪明、这么乖顺的孩子谁能不爱？而且聪明得吓人，崔维兹甚至认为她聪明得过分。她曾经见过班德，你知道吗——或者应该说，见过它的全讯影像。不过，她对那些记忆没什么感情，她提到这件事的时候非常冶漠，好像跟她毫不相干，而我晓得是为什么。除了班德是属地原来的王人，菲龙将是下一任主人之外，两人之间根本没有其他关系。”
“菲龙了解班德是她的父亲吗？”
“应该说是她的母亲。既然我们同意将菲龙视为女性，那么班德也是。”
“都一样，宝绮思吾爱。菲龙是否明了这着亲子关系？”
“我不知道她对这点了解多少，她当然有可能知道，但她始终没表露出来。可是，裴，她推论出班德已经死了，因为她终于明白健比停摆是停电的结果，而负责提供电力的是班德——这实在令我害怕。”
裴洛拉特体贴地说：“为什么害怕，宝绮思？这毕竟只是逻辑推论罢了。”
“从班德的死亡，就能推出另一个结论。索拉利的居民是长寿而孤立的外世界人，死亡必定是罕见而遥远的事件。他们目睹自然死亡的经验一定极其有限，对菲龙那种年纪的索拉利儿童而言，也许根本是一片空白。假如菲龙继续思索班德的死，她就会开始怀疑死因为何。我们这几个陌生人当时在那里，这个事实当然会让她导出一个明显的因果关系。”
“那就是我们杀了班德？”
“不是我们杀了班德，裴，是我干的。”
“她不可能猜到。”
“可是我必须告诉她实情。她原本就对崔维兹很恼火，而崔维兹显然是我们的劣谟，她自然会认为班德的死是他一手造成的。裴，我怎么能让崔维兹背这个黑锅呢？”
“那又有什么关系，宝绮思？那孩子对她的父——母亲毫无感情，她爱的只是她的机器人，健比。”
“可是她母亲的死导致那机器人的死。我差点就要自己招认了，有股强烈的力量在驱策我。”
“为什么？”
“那样的话，我就可以用我的方式解释，可以在她自己发现真相之前安慰她。否则，如果她藉着推理得到答案，缓箢我们对这件事百口莫辩。”
“但我们有申辩的正当理由啊，那是种自卫行为。假使当时你不采取行动，下一刻我们就是死人了。”
“我的确该那样说，但我无法对她解释，我怕她不相信我。”
裴洛拉特摇了摇头，又叹了一口气。“你认为当初我们如果没带她走会比较好吗？现在这种情形令你很不快乐。”
“不，”宝绮思生气了：“不要那样说。假如我现在坐在这里，想到我们曾经遗弃一个无辜的幼童，而且由于我们的作为令她惨遭无情的屠杀，那会使我更不快乐、更痛苦。”
“在菲龙的世界里，那就是解决之道。”
“好了，裴，别陷入崔维兹的思考模式。孤立体有办法接受这种事，而且不会多加深思。然而，盖娅的行为准则是拯救生命，并非毁灭生命——或是坐视生命遭到毁灭。我们都知道，各种生命都必须不断死亡，好让后起的生命有存活的机会，可是绝不该无缘无故、毫无价值地死去。班德的死虽无可避免，仍然令我难以承受，菲龙要是也死了，那我绝对会受不了。”
“啊，”裴洛拉特说：“我想你说得没错——不过，我找你不是因为菲龙的问题，而是为了崔维兹。”
“崔维兹怎么了？”
“宝绮思，我很担心他。他正等着揭开地球的真面目，我不确定他受得了这个压力。”
“我可不怕，我相信他有颗强健坚固的心。”
“我们每个人都有极限。听我说，地球那颗行星的温度比预期的高——这是他告诉我的。我怀疑他认为地球温度过高，不可能有生命存在，尽避他一直想说服自己事实并非如此。”
“或许他是对的，或许温度没有高到那种秤谌。”
“此外他还承认，这种温度可能是放射性地壳造成的结果，但是他也拒绝相信这点——在一两天内，我们就会达到够近的距离，那时便会真相大白。假如地球果真具有放射性呢？”
“那么他就得面对现实。”
“可是——我不知道该怎么说，或是该用什么精神力学的术语。万一，他心灵的……”
宝绮思等不到下文，便以挖苦的口气说：“保险丝烧断了？”
“对，保险丝烧断了。你现在不该帮他做点什么吗？比如说，让他保持心理平衡，不至于失去控制？”
“不行，裴。我不相信他那么脆弱，而且盖娅做过一项坚决的决定，绝不去干扰他的心灵。”
“但这正是问题的症结所在。他拥有一种罕见的气正确性”——不论你要如何称呼它。在眼看就要成功的时候，他若是发现整个计划化为泡影，必定会受到很大的打击，虽然不一定会损坏他的脑子，却有可能毁了他的‘正确性’。那是一种极不寻常的特质，难道不会同样异常脆弱吗？”
宝绮思沉思了一下，然后耸了耸肩。“嗯，或许我该看着他点。”
93
接下来的三十六小时中，崔维兹隐约感到宝绮思一直尾随自己的脚步，而裴洛拉特也有这种倾向。话说回来，在一艘如此袖珍的太空艇中，这不是什么特殊的现象，何况他还有其他事要操心，因此没有放在心上。
现在，他坐在电脑前面，发觉另外两人正站在门边。他抬起头来，面无表情地望着他们。
“怎么样？”他以很小的声音说。
裴洛拉特掩饰得很拙劣，他说：“你好吗，葛兰？”
崔维兹说：“问宝绮思，她紧盯着我好几个钟头了。她一定是在刺探我的心灵——有没有，宝绮思？”
“不，我没有。”宝绮思以平静的语气说：“伹你若是感到需要我的帮助，我倒可以试试看——你要我帮你吗？”
“不用了，我为何需要？请便吧，两位。”
裴洛拉特说：“请告诉我们到底怎么回事。”
“猜吧！”
“是不是地球——”
“没错，正是。每个人坚持要我们相信的那件事，竟然千真万确。”崔维兹指了指显像屏幕，画面上呈现的是地球的夜面，后方的太阳完全被蚀去。在布满繁星的天空中，地球看来像个实心的黑色圆盘，边缘围绕着一道断断续续的橙色曲线。
裴洛拉特说：“那些橙色光芒就是放射线吗？”
“不是，那只是经过大气折射的阳光。假如大气层中没那么多云气，它看起来应该是橙色实线构成的圆形。我们根本看不见放射线，各种放射线都被大气吸收了，就连伽玛线也下例外。然而，它们的确会造成次级辐射，相较之下虽然十分微弱，电脑还是有办法侦测出来。那些辐射肉眼仍无法看见，但是电脑每次接收到其中的粒子或波动，都能产生一个可见光的光子，再将地球影像以假色显示。看——”
黑色圆盘各处都出现了暗淡的蓝色光点。
“上面的放射性有多强？”宝绮思低声问道：“强到足以显示没有人类生命存在吗？”
“任何种类的生命都没有。”崔维兹说：“这颗行星绝对无法居住，连最后一个细菌、最后一个病毒都早已绝迹。”
“我们可以去探索一番吗？”裴洛拉特说：“我的意思是穿着太空衣。”
“不出几个小时，我们就会受到无药可救的放射线伤害。”
“那我们该怎么办，葛兰？”
“怎么办？”崔维兹仍面无表情地望着裴洛拉特，“你知道我想怎么办吗？我想带你和宝绮思——还有那孩子——回到盖娅，让你们永远留在那里。然后我准备回端点星去交还太空船；然后我准备向议会辞职，那应该会使布拉诺市长非常高兴：然后我准备靠退休金过活，让银河自求多福。我再也不会过问谢顿计划、基地、第二基地或盖娅。银河自会选择自己的前途，在我有生之年它绝不会毁灭，我又何必关心身后会发生什么事？”
“你这话绝不是当真的，葛兰。”裴洛拉特赶紧说。
崔维兹瞪了他一会儿，然后深深吸了一口气。“没错，我没有当真。可是，噢，我多希望能照我刚才说的去做。”
“别再提那些了，你现在打算怎么做？”
“让太空船继续绕着地球轨道飞行，休息一下，从这些震惊中恢复过来，然后，再想想下一步该做什么。只不过——”
“不过什么？”
崔维兹突然迭声应道：“下一步我能做什么？还剩下什么可找？还能找到些什么？”
Chapter 20: The Nearby World
94For four successive meals, Pelorat and Bliss had seenTrevize only at meals. During the rest of the time, he was either inthe pilot-room or in his bedroom. At mealtimes, he was silent. His lipsremained pressed together and he ate little.
At the fourth meal, however, it seemed to Pelorat that some ofthe unusual gravity had lifted from Trevize's countenance. Peloratcleared his throat twice, as though preparing to say something and thenretreating.
Finally, Trevize looked up at him and said, "Well?""Have you have you thought it out, Golan?""Why do you ask?""You seem less gloomy.""I'm not less gloomy, but I have beenthinking. Heavily.""May we know what?" asked Pelorat.
Trevize glanced briefly in Bliss's direction. She was looking firmlyat her plate, maintaining a careful silence, as though certain thatPelorat would get further than she at this sensitive moment.
Trevize said, "Are you also curious, Bliss?"She raised her eyes for a moment. "Yes. Certainly."Fallom kicked a leg of the table moodily, and said, "Have we foundEarth?"Bliss squeezed the youngster's shoulder. Trevize paid no attention.
He said, "What we must start with is a basic fact. All informationconcerning Earth has been removed on various worlds. That is bound tobring us to an inescapable conclusion. Something on Earth is beinghidden. And yet, by observation, we see that Earth is radioactivelydeadly, so that anything on it is automatically hidden. No one can landon it, and from this distance, when we are quite near the outer edge ofthe magnetosphere and would not care to approach Earth any more closely,there is nothing for us to find.""Can you be sure of that?" asked Bliss softly.
"I have spent my time at the computer, analyzing Earth in every wayit and I can. There is nothing. What's more, I feel there isnothing. Why, then, has data concerning the Earth been wiped out? Surely,whatever must be hidden is more effectively hidden now than anyone caneasily imagine, and there need be no human gilding of this particularpiece of gold.""It may be," said Pelorat, "that there was indeed something hiddenon Earth at a time when it had not yet grown so severely radioactive asto preclude visitors. People on Earth may then have feared that someonemight land and find this whatever-it-is. It was then thatEarth tried to remove information concerning itself. What we have nowis a vestigial remnant of that insecure time.""No, I don't think so," said Trevize. "The removal of informationfrom the Imperial Library at Trantor seems to have taken place veryrecently." He turned suddenly to Bliss, "Am I right?"Bliss said evenly, "I/we/Gaia gathered that much from the troubledmind of the Second Foundationer Gendibal, when he, you, and I had themeeting with the Mayor of Terminus."Trevize said, "So whatever must have had to be hidden because thereexisted the chance of finding it must still be in hiding now ,and there must be danger of finding it now despite the factthat Earth is radioactive.""How is that possible?" asked Pelorat anxiously.
"Consider," said Trevize. "What if what was on Earth is no longeron Earth, but was removed when the radioactive danger grew greater? Yetthough the secret is no longer on Earth, it may be that if we can findEarth, we would be able to reason out the place where the secret hasbeen taken. If that were so, Earth's whereabouts would still have tobe hidden."Fallom's voice piped up again. "Because if we can't find Earth,Bliss says you'll take me back to Jemby."Trevize turned toward Fallom and glared and Bliss said, in alow voice, "I told you we might , Fallom. We'll talk aboutit later. Right now, go to your room and read, or play the flute, oranything else you want to do. Go go."Fallom, frowning sulkily, left the table.
Pelorat said, "But how can you say that, Golan? Here we are. We'velocated Earth. Can we now deduce where whatever it is might be if itisn't on Earth?"It took a moment for Trevize to get over the moment of ill humorFallom had induced. Then, he said, "Why not? Imagine the radioactivity ofEarth's crust growing steadily worse. The population would be decreasingsteadily through death and emigration, and the secret, whatever it is,would be in increasing danger. Who would remain to protect it? Eventually,it would have to be shifted to another world, or the use of whateverit was would be lost to Earth. I suspect there would be reluctanceto move it and it is likely that it would be done more or less at thelast minute. Now, then, Janov, remember the old man on New Earth whofilled your ears with his version of Earth's history?""Monolee?""Yes. He. Did he not say in reference to the establishment of New Earththat what was left of Earth's population was brought to the planet?"Pelorat said, "Do you mean, old chap, that what we're searching foris now on New Earth? Brought there by the last of Earth's populationto leave?"Trevize said, "Might that not be so? New Earth is scarcely betterknown to the Galaxy in general than Earth is, and the inhabitants aresuspiciously eager to keep all Outworlders away.""We were there," put in Bliss. "We didn't find anything.""We weren't looking for anything but the whereabouts of Earth."Pelorat said, in a puzzled way, "But we're looking for somethingwith a high technology; something that can remove information fromunder the nose of the Second Foundation itself, and even from under thenose excuse me, Bliss of Gaia. Those people on New Earth maybe able to control their patch of weather and may have some techniquesof biotechnology at their disposal, but I think you'll admit that theirlevel of technology is, on the whole, quite low."Bliss nodded. "I agree with Pel."Trevize said, "We're judging from very little. We never did see themen of the fishing fleet. We never saw any part of the island but thesmall patch we landed on. What might we have found if we had exploredmore thoroughly? After all, we didn't recognize the fluorescent lightstill we saw them in action, and if it appeared that the technology waslow, appeared , I say ""Yes?" said Bliss, clearly unconvinced.
"That could be part of the veil intended to obscure the truth.""Impossible," said Bliss.
"Impossible? It was you who told me, back on Gaia, that at Trantor,the larger civilization was deliberately held at a level of low technologyin order to hide the small kernel of Second Foundationers. Why mightnot the same strategy be used on New Earth?""Do you suggest, then, that we return to New Earth and face infectionagain this time to have it activated? Sexual intercourse isundoubtedly a particularly pleasant mode of infection, but it may notbe the only one."Trevize shrugged. "I am not eager to return to New Earth, but we mayhave to."" May ?""May! After all, there is another possibility.""What is that?""New Earth circles the star the people call Alpha. But Alpha is part ofa binary system. Might there not be a habitable planet circling Alpha'scompanion as well?""Too dim, I should think," said Bliss, shaking her head. "The companionis only a quarter as bright as Alpha is.""Dim, but not too dim. If there is a planet fairly close to the star,it might do."Pelorat said, "Does the computer say anything about any planets forthe companion?"Trevize smiled grimly. "I checked that. There are five planets ofmoderate size. No gas giants.""And are any of the five planets habitable?""The computer gives no information at all about the planets, otherthan their number, and the fact that they aren't large.""Oh," said Pelorat deflated.
Trevize said, "That's nothing to be disappointed about. None of theSpacer worlds are to be found in the computer at all. The informationon Alpha itself is minimal. These things are hidden deliberately and ifalmost nothing is known about Alpha's companion, that might almost beregarded as a good sign.""Then," said Bliss, in a business-like manner, "what you are planningto do is this visit the companion and, if that draws a blank,return to Alpha itself.""Yes. And this time when we reach the island of New Earth, we willbe prepared. We will examine the entire island meticulously beforelanding and, Bliss, I expect you to use your mental abilities toshield "And at that moment, the Far Star lurched slightly, as thoughit had undergone a ship-sized hiccup, and Trevize cried out, halfwaybetween anger and perplexity, "Who's at the controls?"And even as he asked, he knew very well who was.
95Fallom, at the computer console, was completelyabsorbed. Her small, long-fingered hands were stretched wide in order tofit the faintly gleaming handmarks on the desk. Fallom's hands seemedto sink into the material of the desk, even though it was clearly feltto be hard and slippery.
She had seen Trevize hold his hands so on a number of occasions,and she hadn't seen him do more than that, though it was quite plain toher that in so doing he controlled the ship.
On occasion, Fallom had seen Trevize close his eyes, and she closedhers now. After a moment or two, it was almost as though she hearda faint, far-off voice far off, but sounding in her own head,through (she dimly realized) her transducer-lobes. They were even moreimportant than her hands. She strained to make out the words.
Instructions, it said, almost pleadingly. What are yourinstructions? Fallom didn't say anything. She had never witnessed Trevize sayinganything to the computer but she knew what it was that she wantedwith all her heart. She wanted to go back to Solaria, to the comfortingendlessness of the mansion, to Jemby          by She wanted to go there and, as she thought of the world she loved,she imagined it visible on the viewscreen as she had seen other worldsshe didn't want. She opened her eyes and stared at the viewscreen willingsome other world there than this hateful Earth, then staring at what shesaw, imagining it to be Solaria. She hated the empty Galaxy to whichshe had been introduced against her will. Tears came to her eyes, andthe ship trembled.
She could feel that tremble, and she swayed a little in response.
And then she heard loud steps in the corridor outside and, when sheopened her eyes, Trevize's face, distorted, filled her vision, blockingout the viewscreen, which held all she wanted. He was shouting something,but she paid no attention. It was he who had taken her from Solaria bykilling Bander, and it was he who was preventing her from returning bythinking only of Earth, and she was not going to listen to him.
She was going to take the ship to Solaria, and, with the intensityof her resolve, it trembled again.
96Bliss clutched wildly at Trevize'sarm. "Don't! Don't!"She clung strongly, holding him back, while Pelorat stood, confusedand frozen, in the background.
Trevize was shouting, "Take your hands off the computer! Bliss,don't get in my way. I don't want to hurt you."Bliss said, in a tone that seemed almost exhausted, "Don't offerviolence to the child. I'd have to hurt you  againstall instructions."Trevize's eyes darted wildly from Fallom to Bliss. He said, "Thenyou get her off, Bliss. Now!"Bliss pushed him away with surprising strength (drawing it, Trevizethought afterward, from Gaia, perhaps).
"Fallom," she said, "lift your hands.""No," shrieked Fallom. "I want the ship to go to Solaria. I want itto go there. There." She nodded toward the viewscreen with her head,unwilling to let even one hand release its pressure on the desk forthe purpose.
But Bliss reached for the child's shoulders and, as her hands touchedFallom, the youngster began to tremble.
Bliss's voice grew soft. "Now, Fallom, tell the computer to be asit was and come with me. Come with me." Her hands stroked the child,who collapsed in an agony of weeping.
Fallom's hands left the desk, and Bliss, catching her under thearmpits, lifted her into a standing position. She turned her, held herfirmly against her breast, and allowed the child to smother her wrenchingsobs there.
Bliss said to Trevize, who was now standing dumbly in the doorway,"Step out of the way, Trevize, and don't touch either of us as wepass."Trevize stepped quickly to one side.
Bliss paused a moment, saying in a low voice to Trevize, "I had to getinto her mind for a moment. If I've caused any damage, I won't forgiveyou easily."It was Trevize's impulse to tell her he didn't care a cubic millimeterof vacuum for Fallom's mind; that it was the computer for which hefeared. Against the concentrated glare of Gaia, however (surely it wasn'tonly Bliss whose sole expression could inspire the moment of cold terrorhe felt), he kept silent.
He remained silent for a perceptible period, and motionless as well,after Bliss and Fallom had disappeared into their room. He remained so,in fact, until Pelorat said softly, "Golan, are you all right? She didn'thurt you, did she?"Trevize shook his head vigorously, as though to shake off the touchof paralysis that had afflicted him. "I'm all right. The real questionis whether that's all right." He sat down at the computerconsole, his hands resting on the two handmarks which Fallom's handshad so recently covered.
"Well?" said Pelorat anxiously.
Trevize shrugged. "It seems to respond normally. I might conceivablyfind something wrong later on, but there's nothing that seems offnow." Then, more angrily, "The computer should not combine effectivelywith any hands other than mine, but in that hermaphrodite's case, itwasn't the hands alone. It was the transducer-lobes, I'm sure ""But what made the ship shake? It shouldn't do that, should it?""No. It's a gravitic ship and we shouldn't have these inertialeffects. But that she-monster " He paused, looking angry again.
"Yes?""I suspect she faced the computer with two self-contradictory demands,and each with such force that the computer had no choice but to attemptto do both things at once. In the attempt to do the impossible, thecomputer must have released the inertia-free condition of the shipmomentarily. At least that's what I think happened."And then, somehow, his face smoothed out. "And that might be agood thing, too, for it occurs to me now that all my talk about AlphaCentauri and its companion was flapdoodle. I know now where Earth musthave transferred its secret."97Pelorat stared, then ignored the final remark andwent back to an earlier puzzle. "In what way did Fallom ask for twoself-contradictory things?""Well, she said she wanted the ship to go to Solaria.""Yes. Of course, she would.""But what did she mean by Solaria? She can't recognize Solaria fromspace. She's never really seen it from space. She was asleep when weleft that world in a hurry. And despite her readings in your library,together with whatever Bliss has told her, I imagine she can't reallygrasp the truth of a Galaxy of hundreds of billions of stars and millionsof populated planets. Brought up, as she was, underground and alone,it is all she can do to grasp the bare concept that there are differentworlds but how many? Two? Three? Four? To her any world she seesis likely to be Solaria, and given the strength of her wishful thinking,is Solaria. And since I presume Bliss has tried to quiet her by hintingthat if we don't find Earth, we'll take her back to Solaria, she mayeven have worked up the notion that Solaria is close to Earth.""But how can you tell this, Golan? What makes you think it's so?""She as much as told us so, Janov, when we burst in upon her. She criedout that she wanted to go to Solaria and then added `there there,'
nodding her head at the viewscreen. And what is on the viewscreen? Earth'ssatellite. It wasn't there when I left the machine before dinner; Earthwas. But Fallom must have pictured the satellite in her mind when sheasked for Solaria, and the computer, in response, must therefore havefocused on the satellite. Believe me, Janov, I know how this computerworks. Who would know better?"Pelorat looked at the thick crescent of light on the viewscreen andsaid thoughtfully, "It was called `moon' in at least one of Earth'slanguages; `Luna,' in another language. Probably many other names,too. Imagine the confusion, old chap, on a world with numerouslanguages the misunderstandings, the complications, the ""Moon?" said Trevize. "Well, that's simple enough. Then, too,come to think of it, it may be that the child tried, instinctively,to move the ship by means of its transducer-lobes, using the ship's ownenergy-source, and that may have helped produce the momentary inertialconfusion. But none of that matters, Janov. What does matter is thatall this has brought this moon yes, I like the name to thescreen and magnified it, and there it still is. I'm looking at it now,and wondering.""Wondering what, Golan?""At the size of it. We tend to ignore satellites, Janov. They'resuch little things, when they exist at all. This one is different,though. It's a world . It has a diameter of about thirty-fivehundred kilometers.""A world? Surely you wouldn't call it a world. It can't behabitable. Even a thirty-five-hundred-kilometer diameter is too small. Ithas no atmosphere. I can tell that just looking at it. No clouds. Thecircular curve against space is sharp, so is the inner curve that boundsthe light and dark hemisphere."Trevize nodded, "You're getting to be a seasoned space traveler,Janov. You're right. No air. No water. But that only means the moon'snot habitable on its unprotected surface. What about underground?""Underground?" said Pelorat doubtfully.
"Yes. Underground. Why not? Earth's cities were underground, you tellme. We know that Trantor was underground. Comporellon has much of itscapital city underground. The Solarian mansions were almost entirelyunderground. It's a very common state of affairs.""But, Golan, in every one of these cases, people were living on ahabitable planet. The surface was habitable, too, with an atmosphereand with an ocean. Is it possible to live underground when the surfaceis uninhabitable??
"Come, Janov, think! Where are we living right now? The Far Star is a tiny world that has an uninhabitable surface. There's no air orwater on the outside. Yet we live inside in perfect comfort. The Galaxyis full of space stations and space settlements of infinite variety,to say nothing of spaceships, and they're all uninhabitable except forthe interior. Consider the moon a gigantic spaceship.""With a crew inside?""Yes. Millions of people, for all we know; and plants and animals;and an advanced technology. Look, Janov, doesn't it make sense? IfEarth, in its last days, could send out a party of Settlers to a planetorbiting Alpha Centauri; and if, possibly with Imperial help, they couldattempt to terraform it, seed its oceans, build dry land where there wasnone; could Earth not also send a party to its satellite and terraformits interior?"Pelorat said reluctantly, "I suppose so.""It would be done. If Earth has something to hide,why send it over a parsec away, when it could be hidden on a world lessthan a hundred millionth the distance to Alpha. And the moon would be amore efficient hiding place from the psychological standpoint. No onewould think of satellites in connection with life. For that matter Ididn't. With the moon an inch before my nose, my thoughts went haringoff to Alpha. If it hadn't been for Fallom " His lips tightened,and he shook his head. "I suppose I'll have to credit her for that. Blisssurely will if I don't."Pelorat said, "But see here, old man, if there's something hidingunder the surface of the moon, how do we find it? There must be millionsof square kilometers of surface ""Roughly forty million.""And we would have to inspect all of that, looking for what? Anopening? Some sort of airlock?"Trevize said, "Put that way, it would seem rather a task, but we'renot just looking for objects, we're looking for life; and for intelligentlife at that. And we've got Bliss, and detecting intelligence is hertalent, isn't it?"98Bliss looked at Trevize accusingly. "I've finally got herto sleep. I had the hardest time. She was wild . Fortunately,I don't think I've damaged her."Trevize said coldly, "You might try removing her fixation on Jemby,you know, since I certainly have no intention of ever going back toSolaria.""Just remove her fixation, is that it? What do you know about suchthings, Trevize? You've never sensed a mind. You haven't the faintestidea of its complexity. If you knew anything at all about it, you wouldn'ttalk about removing a fixation as though it were just a matter of scoopingjam out of a jar.""Well, weaken it at least.""I might weaken it a bit, after a month of careful dethreading.""What do you mean, dethreading?""To someone who doesn't know, it can't be explained.""What are you going to do with the child, then?""I don't know yet; it will take a lot of consideration.""In that case," said Trevize, "let me tell you what we're going todo with the ship.""I know what you're going to do. It's back to New Earth and another tryat the lovely Hiroko, if she'll promise not to infect you this time."Trevize kept his face expressionless. He said, "No, as a matter offact. I've changed my mind. We're going to the moon which is thename of the satellite, according to Janov.""The satellite? Because it's the nearest world at hand? I hadn'tthought of that.""Nor I. Nor would anyone have thought of it. Nowhere in the Galaxyis there a satellite worth thinking about but this satellite,in being large, is unique. What's more, Earth's anonymity covers it aswell. Anyone who can't find the Earth can't find the moon, either.""Is it habitable?""Not on the surface, but it is not radioactive, not at all, so itisn't absolutely uninhabitable. It may have life it may be teemingwith life, in fact under the surface. And, of course, you'll beable to tell if that's so, once we get close enough."Bliss shrugged. "I'll try. But, then, what made you suddenlythink of trying the satellite?"Trevize said quietly, "Something Fallom did when she was at thecontrols."Bliss waited, as though expecting more, then shrugged again. "Whateverit was, I suspect you wouldn't have gotten the inspiration if you hadfollowed your own impulse and killed her.""I had no intention of killing her, Bliss."Bliss waved her hand. "All right. Let it be. Are we moving towardthe moon now?""Yes. As a matter of caution, I'm not going too fast, but if all goeswell, we'll be in its vicinity in thirty hours."99The moon was a wasteland. Trevize watched the brightdaylit portion drifting past them below. It was a monotonous panoramaof crater rings and mountainous areas, and of shadows black against thesunlight. There were subtle color changes in the soil and occasionalsizable stretches of flatness, broken by small craters.
As they approached the nightside, the shadows grew longer and finallyfused together. For a while, behind them, peaks glittered in the sun,like fat stars, far outshining their brethren in the sky. Then theydisappeared and below was only the fainter light of the Earth in thesky, a large bluish-white sphere, a little more than half full. The shipfinally outran the Earth, too, which sank beneath the horizon so thatunder them was unrelieved blackness, and above only the faint powderingof stars, which, to Trevize, who had been brought up on the starlessworld of Terminus, was always miracle enough.
Then, new bright stars appeared ahead, first just one or two, thenothers, expanding and thickening and finally coalescing. And at once theypassed the terminator into the daylit side. The sun rose with infernalsplendor, while the viewscreen shifted away from it at once and polarizedthe glare of the ground beneath.
Trevize could see quite well that it was useless to hope to find anyway into the inhabited interior (if that existed) by mere eye inspectionof this perfectly enormous world.
He turned to look at Bliss, who sat beside him. She did not look atthe viewscreen; indeed, she kept her eyes closed. She seemed to havecollapsed into the chair rather than to be sitting in it.
Trevize, wondering if she were asleep, said softly, "Do you detectanything else?"Bliss shook her head very slightly. "No," she whispered. "There wasjust that faint whiff. You'd better take me back there. Do you knowwhere that region was?""The computer knows."It was like zeroing in on a target, shifting this way and that and thenfinding it. The area in question was still deep in the nightside and,except that the Earth shone fairly low in the sky and gave the surfacea ghostly ashen glow between the shadows, there was nothing to make out,even though the light in the pilot-room had been blacked out for betterviewing.
Pelorat had approached and was standing anxiously in the doorway. "Havewe found anything?" he asked, in a husky whisper.
Trevize held up his hand for silence. He was watching Bliss. He knewit would be days before sunlight would return to this spot on the moon,but he also knew that for what Bliss was trying to sense, light of anykind was irrelevant.
She said, "It's there.""Are you sure?""Yes.""And it's the only spot?""It's the only spot I've detected. Have you been over every part ofthe moon's surface?""We've been over a respectable fraction of it.""Well, then, in that respectable fraction, this is all I havedetected. It's stronger now, as though it has detectedus and it doesn't seem dangerous. The feeling I get is awelcoming one.""Are you sure?""It's the feeling I get."Pelorat said, "Could it be faking the feeling?"Bliss said, with a trace of hauteur, "I would detect a fake, I assureyou."Trevize muttered something about overconfidence, then said, "Whatyou detect is intelligence, I hope.""I detect strong intelligence. Except " And an odd note enteredher voice.
"Except what?""Ssh. Don't disturb me. Let me concentrate." The last word was a meremotion of her lips.
Then she said, in faint elated surprise, "It's not human.""Not human," said Trevize, in much stronger surprise. "Are we dealingwith robots again? As on Solaria?""No." Bliss was smiling. "It's not quite robotic, either.""It has to be one or the other.""Neither." She actually chuckled. "It's not human, and yet it's notlike any robot I've detected before."Pelorat said, "I would like to see that." He nodded his headvigorously, his eyes wide with pleasure. "It would be exciting. Somethingnew.""Something new," muttered Trevize with a sudden lift of his ownspirits and a flash of unexpected insight seemed to illuminatethe interior of his skull.
100Down they sank to the moon's surface, in what was almostjubilation. Even Fallom had joined them now and, with the abandonmentof a youngster, was hugging herself with unbearable joy as though shewere truly returning to Solaria.
As for Trevize, he felt within himself a touch of sanity tellinghim that it was strange that Earth or whatever of Earth was onthe moon which had taken such measures to keep off all others,should now be taking measures to draw them in. Could the purpose be thesame in either way? Was it a case of "If you can't make them avoid you,draw them in and destroy them?" Either way, would not Earth's secretremain untouched?
But that thought faded and drowned in the flood of joy that deepenedsteadily as they came closer to the moon's surface. Yet over and beyondthat, he managed to cling to the moment of illumination that had reachedhim just before they had begun their gliding dive to the surface of theEarth's satellite.
He seemed to have no doubt as to where the ship was going. Theywere just above the tops of the rolling hills now, and Trevize, atthe computer, felt no need to do anything. It was as though he and thecomputer, both, were being guided, and he felt only an enormous euphoriaat having the weight of responsibility taken away from him.
They were sliding parallel to the ground, toward a cliff that raisedits menacing height as a barrier against them; a barrier glisteningfaintly in Earth-shine and in the light-beam of the Far Star . Theapproach of certain collision seemed to mean nothing to Trevize, and itwas with no surprise whatever that he became aware that the section ofcliff directly ahead had fallen away and that a corridor, gleaming inartificial light, had opened before them.
The ship slowed to a crawl, apparently of its own accord, and fittedneatly into the opening entering sliding along Theopening closed behind it, and another then opened before it. Throughthe second opening went the ship, into a gigantic hall that seemed thehollowed interior of a mountain.
The ship halted and all aboard rushed to the airlock eagerly. Itoccurred to none of them, not even to Trevize, to check. whether theremight be a breathable atmosphere outside or any atmosphere atall.
There was air, however. It was breathable and it wascomfortable. They looked about themselves with the pleased air of peoplewho had somehow come home and it was only after a while that they becameaware of a man who was waiting politely for them to approach.
He was tall, and his expression was grave. His hair was bronze incolor, and cut short. His cheekbones were broad, his eyes were bright,and his clothing was rather after the fashion one saw in ancient historybooks. Although he seemed sturdy and vigorous there was, just the same,an air of weariness about him not in anything that one could see,but rather in something appealing to no recognizable sense.
It was Fallom who reacted first. With a loud, whistling scream, sheran toward the man, waving her arms and crying, "Jemby! Jemby!" in abreathless fashion.
She never slackened her pace, and when she was close enough, the manstooped and lifted her high in the air. She threw her arms about his neck,sobbing, and still gasping, "Jemby!"The others approached more soberly and Trevize said, slowly anddistinctly (could this man understand Galactic?), "We ask pardon,sir. This child has lost her protector and is searching for itdesperately. How it came to fasten on you is a puzzle to us, since itis seeking a robot; a mechanical "The man spoke for the first time. His voice was utilitarian ratherthan musical, and there was a faint air of archaism clinging to it,but he spoke Galactic with perfect ease.
"I greet you all in friendship," he said and he seemedunmistakably friendly, even though his face continued to remain fixed inits expression of gravity. "As for this child," he went on, "she showsperhaps a greater perceptivity than you think, for I am a robot. My nameis Daneel Olivaw."
第二十章 邻近的世界
　　94
连续四顿饭的时间中，裴洛拉特与宝绮思只有用餐时才得见崔维兹。其余时候，他不是在驾驶舱中，就是躲在寝舱里。用餐时他始终保持沉默，嘴唇紧紧抿住，而且总是只吃一点点。
不过，在第四餐的时候，裴洛拉特察觉到，崔维兹异常凝着的神色似乎缓和了些。裴洛拉特清了喉咙两次，彷佛准备说些什么，结果两次都欲言又止。
最后，崔维兹抬起头来，望着他说：“怎么样？”
“你有没有——有没有想出来，葛兰？”
“你为什么这样问？”
“你看来好像没那么沮丧了。”
“不是没那么沮丧，而是我正在思考，专注地思考。”
“我们可以知道内容吗？”裴洛拉特问。
崔维兹朝宝绮思那边瞥了一下，她却盯着面前的餐盘，谨慎地保持沉默。彷佛她能确定，在这个敏感时刻，裴洛拉特比她更能问出些名堂。
崔维兹说：“你也好奇吗，宝绮思？”
她抬了抬眼睛。“是的，当然啦。”
菲龙踢了一下桌脚，像是在闹别扭，然后说：“我们找到地球了吗？”
宝绮思用力搂住那孩子的肩膀，崔维兹则根本没理会。
他说：“我们必须从一项基本事实开始探讨。在每个世界上，所有关于地球的资料都被移走了，这就让我们导出一个必然的结论：地球上有什么东西被藏起来。然而，根据观察的结果，我们发现地球具有致命的放射性，因此上面不论有什么，都自然而然藏了起来。登陆地球是不可能的事，我们目前所在的距离，已经相当接近磁层的外缘——而我们也不打算再靠近了——却什么也没有发现。”
“你能确定这点吗？”宝绮思轻声问道。
“我在电脑上花了很多时间，用它和我想得到的各种方法来分析地球，结果什么都没发现；而更着要的是，我觉得不会发现什么。如此，有关地球的资料为什么会被清除呢？需要隐藏的东西不论是什么，现在它的安全秤谌已超乎任何人想像，哪还需要再多费工夫，大动手脚呢？”
“有可能是这样的，”裴洛拉特说：“当地球的放射性尚未变得那么严着，还不至于使外人却步的时候，的确有什么东西藏在它上面。当时，地球上的人也许担心会有外人来到，进而发现那个秘密。因此，地球企图除去有关自身的资料，其实是那时候的事情。我们现在发现的结果，只是那个不安全的时代所留下的遗迹。”
“不，我不这么想。”崔维兹说：“位于川陀的帝国图书馆，里面的资料似乎是最近被移走的。”他突然转向宝绮思，“我说得对吗？”
宝绮思以平静的口吻说：“当你、我、第二基地人坚迪柏，以及端点星市长聚会的时候，从坚迪柏忧心忡忡的心灵中，我／我们／盖娅捕捉到了这个讯息。”
崔维兹说：“因此，过去有可能被发现而必须隐藏的东西，现在一定仍藏在某处。纵使地球现在已具有放射性，那东西仍旧有被人发现的危险。”
“那怎么可能？”裴洛拉特好奇地问。
“想想看，”崔维兹说：“原来藏在地球的东西，有没有可能已经不在地球上；当放射性变得越来越危险时，它被移到了别处去？然而，那个秘密现在虽然不在地球上，我们若能找到地球，也许可以推论出秘密被移至何处。果真如此，地球的下落就仍有隐藏的必要。”
菲龙又用尖锐的声音说：“因为如果我们找不到地球，宝绮思说你就会带我回到健比身边。”
崔维兹转头面向菲龙，以凶狠的目光瞪着她。宝绮思赶紧低声道：“我是说我们可能会，菲龙。我们待会儿再讨论这件事，现在回到你的舱房去看书，或是玩笛子，或是做你想做的任何事。去——快去。”
菲龙皱着眉头，悻悻然地离开餐桌。
裴洛拉特说：“可是你凭什么这样说呢，葛兰？我们到了这里，我们已经发现地球。不论那是什么秘密，假如它不在地球上，我们有办法推论出它可能藏在何处吗？”
崔维兹花了点时间才摆脱被菲龙搞坏的情绪。然后他说：“怎么不能？试想，地球表面的放射性持续不断恶化，由于死亡率与移民剧增，地球人口因此不断锐减。而那个秘密，不管它是什么，处境就越来越危险。谁还缓篝下来保护它呢？最后，它一定会被送往其他世界，否则这个秘密——不管它是什么——就没有作用了。我猜一定有人不愿将它移走，这件事有可能是最后一刻才完成的。好啦，詹诺夫，还记不记得新地球的那个老者，拼命对你讲述自家地球历史的那位？”
“单姓李？”
“没错，就是他。当他提到有关新地球的建立时，是不是说地球残存的居民都被带到那颗行星？”
裴洛拉特说：“老弟，你的意思是说，我们所要寻找的东西，如今位于新地球上？由最后一批离开地球的人带去的？”
崔维兹说：“难道没这个可能吗？在整个银河之中，新地球的知名度没有地球高，而那里的居民竭尽所能和外星人士隔绝，这点就很可疑。”
“我们到过那里，”宝绮思插嘴道：“什么也没发现。”
“当时，我们一心打探地球的下落，没注意到其他事情。”
裴洛拉特以困惑的口气说：“但我们要找的是跟高科技有关的东西，它能在第二基地的地盘上将资料偷走，甚至还能——对不起，宝绮思——侵入盖娅的地盘行事。那些住在新地球上的人类，或许能控制头上一小块的天气，也可能拥有某些生物科技，可是我想你也会承认，整体而言，他们的科技水准相当低。”
宝绮思点了点头。“我同意裴的看法。”
崔维兹说：“我们这是以偏概全。我们一直没见到渔船上的男人；除了我们着陆地点附近之外，我们没观察过岛屿的其他部分。如果我们搜寻得更彻底，有没有可能发现些什么呢？毕竟，我们本来并未认出那些萤光灯，直到目睹它们运作才恍然大悟。如果科技看来落后，我是说‘看’……”
“怎么样？”宝绮思显然未被说服。
“那可能是故意制造的烟幕，目的是要混淆真相。”
“不可能。”宝绮思说。
“不可能？当初在盖娅时，是你亲口告诉我说，川陀大部分的文明都故意保持低科技水准，以便隐藏第二基地人组成的核心。同样的策略为什么不能用在新地球上？”
“那么，你是不是建议我们回新地球去，再去面对那种传染病——这次让它真正发作？性行为无疑是特别愉快的传染方式，但可能并非唯一的途径。”
崔维兹耸了耸肩。“我不急着回新地球，不过也许有这个必要。”
“也许？”
“也许！毕竟，还有另一种可能性。”
“什么可能性？”
“新地球环绕着那颗叫作阿尔发的恒星，阿尔发则是双星系的一部分。在阿尔发那颗伴星的轨道上，难道没有可住人行星吗？”
“我认为它太暗了。”宝绮思一面说一面摇头，“那颗伴星的光度只有阿尔发的四分之一。”
“虽然暗，但并不至于太暗。如果有行星相当接近那颗恒星，仍然可能适于住人。”
裴洛拉特说：“电脑提到那颗伴星有任何行星吗？”
崔维兹冷笑了一下。“我已经查过了，有五颗不大不小的行星，没有气态巨行星。”
“那五颗行星中，有任何适于住人的吗？”
“电脑只给出它们的总数，并指出它们体积不大，此外没有提供任何资料。”
“喔——”裴洛拉特显得很泄气。
崔维兹说：“没什么好失望的，电脑中也找不到任何一个外世界，阿尔发本身的资料也少得不能再少，这些资料都被故意藏起来。如果电脑对阿尔发的伴星几乎一无所知，反倒可以视为好兆头。”
“所以，”宝绮思一本正经地说：“你是打算这么做——先去造访那颗伴星，如果无功而返的话，再回头去找阿尔发。”
“没错，而这一次，当我们抵达新地球那座岛屿时，我们将有所准备。在我们着陆前，我们会仔仔细细将整座岛屿搜索一遍。宝绮思，我希望你利用精神力量来屏蔽——”
就在这个时候，远星号突然偏向一侧，好像太空艇打了个嗝似地。崔维兹立刻大叫：“是谁在控制台？”声音中半是愤怒半是困惑。
而在他发问的同时，他已经非常清楚那究竟是谁。
95
坐在电脑台前的菲龙全神贯注。她尽量张开有着修长手指的小小手掌，以便按在桌面那双微微发光的轮廓上。她的手掌似乎陷入实质的桌面，虽然感觉上它显然又硬又滑。
她曾经好几次看到崔维兹双手如此摆放，除此之外，她没见过他有什么其他动作。不过她心中很明白，他这样做就能控制整艘太空艇。
有些时候，菲龙还看到崔维兹闭起双眼，因此她现在也学着这么做。过了一会儿，她似乎听到一个模糊而遥远的声音——十分遥远。（她隐约意识到）但是透过她的转换叶突，那声音在她脑际响起——转换叶突甚至比她的双手更着要——她开始努力分辨那些字句。
“指令，”那声音以近乎恳求的语气说：“您的指令是什么？”
菲龙什么也没说，她从未目睹崔维兹对电脑说过任何话。不过她知道自己全心全意要的是什么，她要回索拉利，回到那座无边无际的舒适宅邸，回去找健比——健比——健比——
她就是要去那里。一想到自己挚爱的世界，她便想像能在显像屏幕上看到它，就像屏幕上出现过许多她不想去的世界那样。她张开双眼凝视着显像屏幕，渴望看到另一个世界，而不是这个可恨的地球，然后她盯着眼前的画面，想像它就是索拉利。她憎恨这个空虚的银河，认识这个银河全然出于无奈，想到这里她的泪水夺眶而出，太空艇则开始颤动。
她能感觉到艇身的颤动，自己也微微晃了一下。
接着，她听到外面走廊传来嘈杂的脚步声。当她睁开眼睛的时候，崔维兹扭曲的脸孔占满她的视野，将显像屏幕完全挡住，遮住了她心中的目的地。他在大吼大叫着什么，伹她并未注意听。杀了班德而将她带离索拉利的是他；一心只有地球而不准她回家的也是他，她决定再也不要听他的话。
她要驾着这艘太空艇回索拉利。当她再度坚定决心时，太空艇又颤动起来。
96
宝绮思粗暴地抓住崔维兹的手臂。“不要！不要！”
她紧紧抱住他，不让他向前走。裴洛拉特则僵立在远处，茫然不知所措。
崔维兹咆哮大叫：“把手拿开，别碰电脑——宝绮思，别拦我，我不想害你受伤。”
宝绮思近乎声嘶力竭地说：“别对这孩子动粗，否则我不得不伤害你——抗命也在所不惜。”
崔维兹将目光从菲龙身上猛然转向宝绮思。“那么你把她拉开，宝绮思，现在就去！”
宝绮思一把推开他，力道大得惊人。（大概是从盖娅那里吸取的力量，崔维兹事后想到。）
“菲龙，”她说：“把手放开。”
“不要，”菲龙尖叫道：“我要太空船飞到索拉利，我要它去那里，那里。”她朝显像屏幕点了点头，甚至不愿让任何一只手离开桌面。
宝绮思伸手探向那孩子的肩头，当她双手碰到菲龙的时候，那孩子开始发抖。
宝绮思改用柔和的声音说：“现在，菲龙，告诉电脑将一切恢复原状，然后跟我走，跟我走。”她双手轻轻抚摩着菲龙，菲龙随即软化，放声痛哭。
菲龙双手离开桌面之后，宝绮思撑着她的胳肢窝拉她起来，然后让她转身，再紧紧抱着她，让这孩子在自己怀里痛快地大哭一场。
崔维兹现在站在门口一言不发，宝绮思对他说：“让开，崔维兹，我们经过的时候，千万别碰我们。”
崔维兹向旁闪开。
宝绮思顿了一下，又压低声音对崔维兹说：“我刚才不得不暂时进入她的心灵，假如因此造成任何伤害，我不会轻易原谅你。”
崔维兹差点就要脱口，告诉她，自己一点都不在乎菲龙的心灵，他担心的只有电脑。然而，在盖娅严厉的目光瞪视之下（当然不只是宝绮思的，她个人的表情无法使他产生不寒而栗的恐惧），他终究什么也没说。
宝绮思与菲龙消失在她们房间后，崔维兹沉默了许久，全身动也不动。事实上，他一直僵在那里，直到裴洛拉特柔声道：“葛兰，你还好吗？她没伤到你吧？”
崔维兹使劲摇了摇头，彷佛想将轻微的麻痹甩掉。“我很好，真正的问题是它好不好。”他坐到电脑台前，将双手放在刚才被菲龙按过的手掌轮廓上。
“怎么样？”裴洛拉特焦急地问。
崔维兹耸了耸肩。“反应似乎正常，等一下也许还是会发现问题，不过现在看不出有何异状。”然后，他以更愤怒的口气说：“除我之外，电脑应该不会和别人的手有效结合。但那个雌雄同体又另当别论，问题不在于她的手，而是她的转换叶突，这点我能肯定……”
“可是太空船为什么震动呢？应该不会这样的，对不对？”
“没错，这艘着力太空船应该不会出现这些惯性效应。但那个母怪物……”他突然打住，看来又火冒三丈。
“怎么样？”
“我猜，她对电脑下了两个互相矛盾的指令，由于每个指令具有同样的效力，电脑只好尝试将两者同时执行。为了进行这种不可能的尝试，电脑一定暂时解除了太空船的无惯性状态，至少我认为事情是这样的。”
他的脸色突然间缓和下来。“或许这不是一件坏事，因为我忽然想通了。我对半人马之阿尔发，以及它的伴星所做的种种推测，其实根本是痴人说梦。现在，我知道地球将秘密转移到哪里了。”
97
裴洛拉特瞪大眼睛，但他没立刻追究最后那句话，而是回到原先的问题。“菲龙如何要求电脑执行互相矛盾的指令？”
“嗯，她说要让太空船飞到索拉利。”
“对，她当然会想那么做。”
“可是她所谓的索拉利是什么？她无法在太空中认出索拉利，她从未真正自太空看过那个世界。当我们匆匆离开索拉利时，她正处于睡眠状态。虽然她从你的图书馆学到很多，宝绮思又告诉她不少知识，但是对于拥有上千亿颗恒星、数千万住人行星的银河，我想她还无法真正了解它的真面目。她从小甭独地生活在地底，顶多只知道有许多不同的世界这个概念。可是究竟有多少？两个？三个？四个？对她而言，她见到的每个世界都可能是索拉利，甚至一厢情愿地将见到的世界都当成索拉利。此外，我想宝绮思为了安抚她，曾对她暗示过，说我们若是找不到地球，就会带她回索拉利，因此她可能还产生了一种想法，认为索拉利很接近地球。”
“可是你又怎么知道呢，葛兰？你为什么会这样想？”
“她几乎等于对我们说了，詹诺夫。我们闯进来找她的时候，她喊着说要到索拉利去，又加上一句‘那里——那里’，还向显像屏幕猛点头。而显像屏幕的画面是什么呢？是地球的卫星。我离开电脑去吃晚餐的时候，屏幕上并非那颗卫星，而是地球。当菲龙要求回到索拉利时，她心中一定想着那个卫星的画面，因此电脑做出的回应，必定是将镜头对准那颗卫星。相信我，詹诺夫，我知道这个电脑如何运作。谁会比我更清楚呢？”
裴洛拉特看了看屏幕上一弯肥厚的新月，意味深长地说：“至少在地球的某种语言中，它被称为‘月球’，另一种语言又称为‘太阴’，此外可能还有许多不同的名称。想想看，一个有着众多语言的世界，老弟，是多么混乱啊——有多少误解，多少纠纷，多少……”
“月球？”崔维兹说：“嗯，这倒是个很简单的名字——此外，你想想看，也许那孩子基于本能，试图藉着转换叶突的作用，利用太空船本身的能源驱动它，那样或许也会造成惯性暂时失调。不过这些都不着要了，詹诺夫，着要的是，这一切阴错阳差让月球——嗯，我喜欢这个名字——出现在屏幕上，它的影像被放大，而且此时仍在那里。我现在正盯着它，而且正在思索。”
“思索什么，葛兰？”
“思索它的大小。我们一向漠视卫星，詹诺夫，它们即使存在，也都是不起眼的小东西。不过这个却不同，它可算一个世界，直径大约有三千五百公里。”
“一个世界？你当然不能称它为世界，它不适于住人，三千五百公里的直径仍太小了。它也没有大气层，我一眼就能看出来。没有云气，和太空交界的圆周线条分明，内部的日夜半球分界曲线也一样。”
崔维兹点了点头。“你快要成为老练的太空旅人了，詹诺夫。你说得没错，没有空气，没有水。伹那仅仅表示月球赤裸的表面不可住人，可是地底呢？”
“地底？”裴洛拉特狐疑地问道。
“对，地底，有何不可？地球的城市曾经建筑在地底，是你告诉我的。此外，我们知道川陀是个地底都会；康普隆的首都很大一部分位于地底；索拉利的宅邸也几乎全在地下，这种情形其实非常普遍。”
“可是，葛兰，在这些例于中，人类仍居住在可住人行星上。那些行星表面都有大气、有海洋，同样可以住人。假如表面不可住人，还有可能住在地底吗？”
“拜托，詹诺夫，动动脑筋！我们现在住在哪里？远星号就是个表面不可住人的微型世界，外面既没有空气也没有水，我们却能在里面住得舒适无比。银河中充满各式各样的太空站和太空殖民地，更遑论各种太空船和星舰，这些都是只有内部才能住人。你就把月球当成一艘巨型太空船吧。”
“里面住着一组人员？”
“对，根据我们所知研判，可能有好几百万人，此外还有许多动植物，以及先进的科技——你看，詹诺夫，这是不是很有道理？假如地球在最后关头，能送出一批殖民者到环绕半人马之阿尔发的行星上；而且，或许是在帝国的协助下，他们有能力改造那颗行星，在它的海洋中播种，还无中生有造起一块陆地，那么，地球难道不能送另一批人到卫星上，并将它的内部改造成可住人的环境？”
裴洛拉特不大情愿地说：“我想是吧。”
“想必就是这样。如果地球有什么东西需要隐藏，何必送到超过一秒差距以外的地方，它附近就有另一个世界，距离还不到阿尔发的亿分之一。此外，就心理学观点而言，月球是个更佳的藏匿地点。没有人会将卫星和生命联想到一块，比如说我就没想到；月球近在眼前，我的心思却飞到阿尔发。倘若不是菲龙——”他紧抿嘴唇，同时摇了摇头。“我想我得将功劳记在她头上，我若不这么做，宝绮思也一定会的。”
裴洛拉特说：“可是我问你，老友，如果有什么东西藏在月球里面，我们又要如何去找？月球表面一定有好几百万平方公里……”
“差不多四千万平方公里。”
“而我们需要全部搜寻一遁。可是该找什么呢？一个开口？某种气闸？”
崔维兹说：“照你这么说，它似乎是件大工程。但我们寻找的不只是物件，我们还要寻找生命，而且是有智慧的生命。我们有宝绮思，侦测智慧是她的看家本领，你说对不对？”
98
宝绮思望着崔维兹，一副兴师问罪的模样。“我总算让她睡着了，这是我一生中最艰难的一天，她简直疯狂了。幸好，我想我没有伤到她。”
崔维兹以冷漠的语气说：“你最好试着除去她对健比的情感固着，你知道吗，因为我绝不打算回索拉利。”
“不过是除去她的情感固着罢了，是吗？这些事你知道多少，崔维兹？你未曾感测过任何心灵，对心灵的复杂度连一点概念也没有。假如你对这方面稍有认识，就不会将除去情感固着说得那么简单，好像只是从瓶子里舀出果酱一样。”
“那么，至少把它减弱一点。”
“我如果花上一个月的时间，小心翼翼地抽丝剥茧，也许能让它减弱一点。”
“你所谓抽丝剥茧是什么意思？”
“对一个毫无概念的人，根本无从解释。”
“那么，你准备让那孩子何去何从？”
“我还不知道，这需要好好考虑一番。”
“这样的话，”崔维兹说：“让我告诉你我们准备让太空船何去何从。”
“我知道你准备怎么做，你要飞回新地球去，还会试着跟可爱的广子再亲热一回，只要她答应这次不将病毒传染给你。”
崔维兹仍旧面无表情。“不对，事实上，我已经改变主意。我们要飞到月球去——月球就是那颗卫星的名字，詹诺夫说的。”
“那颗卫星？因为它是最近的一个世界？我没想到这一点。”
“我也没想到，谁都不会想到。在整个银河中，没有任何卫星值得考虑——这颗超大型卫星是唯一的例外。况且地球的隐密也掩护了它，如果找不到地球，也就找不到这个月球。”
“它可以住人吗？”
“表面不可以，不过它没有放射性，完全没有，所以并非绝对不可住人。它的表层之下也许有生命——事实上，也许充满生命。当然啦，一旦我们足够接近，你就应该可以判断。”
宝绮思耸了耸肩。“我会试试看——不过，是什么使你突然想到试一试这颗卫星？”
崔维兹以平静的口吻说：“刚才，菲龙在控制台前的某个举动。”
宝绮思等了一下，仿佛指望他多讲几句，然后她又耸了耸肩。“不论是什么举动，如果你因一时冲动而将她杀死，我想你就无法得到这个灵感了。”
“我没有要杀死她，宝绮思。”
宝绮思挥了挥手。“好吧，到此为止。我们是不是正朝月球飞去？”
“是的。为了谨慎起见，我不想飞得太快。不过假如一切顺利，三十小时后，我们就能到达它的上空。”
99
月球表面是一片洪荒。崔维兹望着下方不断向后掠去的白昼区域，眼前的景象是干篇一律的陨石坑、山区，以及许多黑暗的阴影。土壤的颜色不时呈现微妙变化，偶尔也会出现一大幅平地，其中仍不免有许多小陨石坑。
当他们快要接近夜面时，各种阴影变得越来越长，最后终于融为一体。这个时候，在他们的后方，可以见到许多山峰在阳光下闪闪发光，像是一些圆胖的星星，比太空中其他星体都明后许多。伹群山不久便消失无踪，再向下望去，天空中只剩下地球暗淡的光影，那是个白里带蓝的巨大球体，看起来比半圆丰满些。然后，地球终于也落在太空艇后面，进而沉到地平线之下，因此下方变作一片绝对的黑暗，而头上只有暗淡稀疏的星辰。不过对端点星长大的崔维兹来说，这种星空景象已足以让他啧啧称奇。
接着，前方开始出现一些明后的星辰，起初只有一两颗，然后渐渐增多，范围越来越大，密度越来越高，最后聚结成一片。此时他们迅速通过昼夜界线，又回到了日照面。初升的太阳带来恶魔般的强光，显像屏幕立刻转移镜头，并偏振了来自下方地表的眩目光芒。
崔维兹心中非常清楚，仅凭肉眼检视这个可谓巨大的世界，想要找到任何通往内部的人口（若真有可住人的地底世界），绝对会徒劳无功。
他转头看了看坐在一旁的宝绮思，她并未注视着显像屏幕，反之，还将双眼都闭起来。她好像不是坐着，而是全身瘫在椅子中。
崔维兹怀疑她是不是睡着了，遂轻声道：“你侦测到什么迹象了吗？”
宝绮思缓缓地、轻轻地摇了摇头。“没有，”她悄声道：“刚刚只有一丝微弱的讯息，你最好带我回那里去。你知道刚才经过的是哪个区域？”
“电脑知道。”
就像瞄准箭靶一样，太空艇前后来回移动，最后终于锁定目标。那个地区仍旧处于夜面深处；虽然驾驶舱的灯光已尽数熄灭，但除了天际微微发后的地球，在月表阴影间映出死灰的光芒外，根本什么部看不清楚。
裴洛拉特走过来，站在驾驶舱门口，神情显得很焦急。“有任何发现吗？”他以沙哑的声音悄悄问道。
崔维兹正盯着宝绮思，他举起手示意裴洛拉特保持肃静。他知道还要好多天之后，阳光才会着新回到月球这一带，不过他也明白，宝绮思目前试图进行的侦测，并不受任何光线影响。
她说：“就在那儿。”
“你确定吗？”
“是的。”
“只有这个地点？”
“我只侦测到这个地点，你飞遍了月球表面每个角落吗？”
“绝大部分我们都经过了。”
“好的，在这绝大部分中，我唯一侦测到讯息的只有这里。它现在变得更强烈，彷佛也侦测到我们了。它似乎没什么危险，我感到的是欢迎的情绪。”
“你确定吗？”
“那是我接收到的感觉。”
裴洛拉特说：“那种情绪会不会是伪造的？”
宝绮思带着一丝骄傲答道：“我能侦测出真假，我向你保证。”
崔维兹咕哝了几句太过自信之类的评语，然后又说：“你侦测到的是智慧吧，我希望如此。”
“我侦测到的是很强的智慧，只不过——”她的语气突然变得很奇怪。
“只不过什么？”
“嘘，不要打扰我，让我全神贯注。”最后几个宇只剩下嘴唇的蠕动，根本听不见声音。
然后，她以透着惊喜的口吻说：“不是人类。”
“不是人类！”崔维兹万分惊讶地说。“我们又在跟机器人打交道吗？就像在索拉利一样？”
“不，”宝绮思微微一笑，“也不完全是机器人。”
“必定是两者之一。”
“都不是。”这回她真的咯咯笑了起来，“它不是人类，却也不像我过去侦测到的任何机器人。”
“我真想看看！”裴洛拉特猛点着头，张大的眼睛中充满喜悦。“多令人兴奋啊，一种新东西！”
“新东西。”崔维兹喃喃说道，同时精神突然一振——一闪意料之外的灵光，似乎照后了他的大脑。
100
他们向月球表面缓缓落下，全都沉浸在一股近乎喜悦的气氛中。就连菲龙也加入了他们的行列，由于小孩子特有的天真，她感到喜不自胜，彷佛真要回到索拉利一样。
但在崔维兹心里，则仍有一丝清明的神智，提醒他这事栢当奇怪。地球——或者原本在地球，现在转移到月球的力量——曾经大费周章逐退所有的人，如今却采取行动吸引他们至此，两者的目的会不会殊途同归？会不会是所谓的“若无法阻止敌人，不妨将计就计藉机歼敌”？这两种做法，不是都能让地球保住秘密吗？
然而，他们越接近月球表面，喜悦的情绪就越深刻，他的疑虑也渐渐被喜悦淹没。但纵使如此，当他们正要冲向月球表面时，他仍紧紧抓住罢才心中突然闪现的那道灵光。
他似乎对太空艇的去向成竹在胸。现在，他们在一片起伏山丘的正上方，崔维兹坐在电脑前面，却感到什么事都不必做，彷佛他与电脑两者皆受到指引。他只觉得如释着负，心中满溢着极度的欣快。
他们现在正贴着地面滑翔，前方耸立着一座险恶的峭壁，像是专门阻挡他们的屏障。在地球的光芒与远星号射出的光束照耀下，这座屏障反映出微弱的光辉。虽然眼看就要撞上去，崔维兹却似乎毫不在意。接着，他发现正前方那块峭壁倒了下来，面前出现一道灯火通明的走廊，他也一点不觉得意外。
太空艇的速度减至最低，显然是自动调整的，然后对准一个大小恰好的入口飞了进去——一路滑行。后方的入口随即关闭，前方又出现另一个人口。太空艇穿过第二个人口后，来到一处像是将山挖空而形成的巨大空间。
太空艇随即停下，四个人迫不及待地冲向气闸。包括崔维兹在内，大家皆未想到检查外面是否有适宜的大气——或是究竟有没有大气存在。
不过外面的确有空气，而且呼吸起来非常舒服。他们像是终于回到家的旅人，神情愉悦地四处张望。过了一会儿，他们才发现前方站着一名男子，彬彬有礼地在那里等候他们。
他的身材高大，表情严肃，古铜色的头发剪得很短。他的颧骨宽阔，双眼炯炯有神，衣着类似古史书籍中才得见的款式。虽然他似乎身强体壮、精力旺盛，却彷佛带有一股倦意——其实外表根本看不出来，那是属于感官外的一种气息。
最先有反应的是菲龙，她发出高声尖叫，像是吹口哨一样，然后拔腿向那人飞奔而去，同时不断挥着手，上气不接下气地叫着：“健比！健比！”
她始终没放慢脚步，她一来到那人面前，他便弯下腰来将她高高举起。她伸出双臂紧紧搂住他的脖子，哇哇大哭起来，一面仍抽抽噎噎地喊着：“健比！”
其他三人以较冷静的步伐向前走去，崔维兹用缓慢而清晰的声音（此人听得懂银河标准语吗？）说：“我们向您致歉，阁下。这孩子失去了她的保母，正在四处拼命寻找。至于她为何抱着您不放，我们也不知该如何解释，因为她要找的是个机器人，一个机械的……”
那人终于开口。他的声音平实，没有任何花腔，而且带着些许古风，伹他说的银河标准语极为流利。
“我伸出友谊之手欢迎诸位。”他说——他的友善似乎毋庸置疑，纵使他的脸孔依然维持严肃的表情。“至于这个孩子，”他继续说：“她的感知能力或许超乎你的想像，因为我正是机器人，我的名字叫丹尼尔•奥利瓦。”
Chapter 21: The Search Ends
101Trevize found himself in a complete state ofdisbelief. He had recovered from the odd euphoria he had felt just beforeand after the landing on the moon a euphoria, he now suspected,that had been imposed on him by this self-styled robot who now stoodbefore him.
Trevize was still staring, and in his now perfectly sane and untouchedmind, he remained lost in astonishment. He had talked in astonishment,made conversation in astonishment, scarcely understood what he said orheard as he searched for something in the appearance of this apparent man,in his behavior, in his manner of speaking, that bespoke the robot.
No wonder, thought Trevize, that Bliss had detected somethingthat was neither human nor robot, but, that was, in Pelorat's words,"something new." Just as well, of course, for it had turned Trevize'sthoughts into another and more enlightening channel but even thatwas now crowded into the back of his mind.
Bliss and Fallom had wandered off to explore the grounds. It hadbeen Bliss's suggestion, but it seemed to Trevize that it came after alightning-quick glance had been exchanged between herself and Daneel. WhenFallom refused and asked to stay with the being she persisted in callingJemby, a grave word from Daneel and a lift of the finger was enough tocause her to trot off at once. Trevize and Pelorat remained.
"They are not Foundationers, sirs," said the robot, as though thatexplained it all. "One is Gaia and one is a Spacer."Trevize remained silent while they were led to simply designed chairsunder a tree. They seated themselves, at a gesture from the robot,and when he sat down, too, in a perfectly human movement, Trevize said,"Are you truly a robot?""Truly, sir," said Daneel.
Pelorat's face seemed to shine with joy. He said, "There arereferences to a robot named Daneel in the old legends. Are you named inhis honor?""I am that robot," said Daneel. "It is not a legend.""Oh no," said Pelorat. "If you are that robot, you would have to bethousands of years old.""Twenty thousand," said Daneel quietly.
Pelorat seemed abashed at that, and glanced at Trevize, who said,with a touch of anger, "If you are a robot, I order you to speaktruthfully.""I do not need to be told to speak truthfully, sir. I must do so. You are faced then, sir, with three alternatives. Either I ama man who is lying to you; or I am a robot who has been programmed tobelieve that it is twenty thousand years old but, in fact, is not; orI am a robot who is twenty thousand years old. You mustdecide which alternative to accept.""The matter may decide itself with continued conversation," saidTrevize dryly. "For that matter, it is hard to believe that this isthe interior of the moon. Neither the light" he looked up as hesaid that, for the light was precisely that of soft, diffuse sunlight,though no sun was in the sky, and, for that matter, no sky was clearlyvisible "nor the gravity seems credible. This world should havea surface gravity of less than 0.2g.""The normal surface gravity would be 0.16g actually, sir. It isbuilt up, however, by the same forces that give you, on your ship, thesensation of normal gravity, even when you are in free fall, or underacceleration. Other energy needs, including the light, are also metgravitically, though we use solar energy where that is convenient. Ourmaterial needs are all supplied by the moon's soil, except for the lightelements hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen which the moon doesnot possess. We obtain those by capturing an occasional comet. One suchcapture a century is more than enough to supply our needs.""I take it Earth is useless as a source of supply.""Unfortunately, that is so, sir. Our positronic brains are as sensitiveto radioactivity as human proteins are.""You use the plural, and this mansion before us seems, large,beautiful, and elaborate at least as seen from the outside. Thereare then other beings on the moon. Humans? Robots?""Yes, sir. We have a complete ecology on the moon and a vast andcomplex hollow within which that ecology exists. The intelligent beingsare all robots, however, more or less like myself. You will see none ofthem, however. As for this mansion, it is used by myself only and it isan establishment that is modeled exactly on one I used to live in twentythousand years ago.""Which you remember in detail, do you?" .
"Perfectly, sir. I was manufactured, and existed for a time howbrief a time it seems to me, now on the Spacer world of Aurora.""The one with the " Trevize paused.
"Yes, sir. The one with the dogs.""You know about that?""Yes, sir.""How do you come to be here, then, if you lived at first onAurora?""Sir, it was to prevent the creation of a radioactive Earth that Icame here in the very beginnings of the settlement of the Galaxy. Therewas another robot with me, named Giskard, who could sense and adjustminds.""As Bliss can?""Yes, sir. We failed, in a way, and Giskard ceased to operate. Beforethe cessation, however, he made it possible for me to have his talentand left it to me to care for the Galaxy; for Earth, particularly.""Why Earth, particularly?""In part because of a man named Elijah Baley, an Earthman."Pelorat put in excitedly, "He is the culture-hero I mentioned sometime ago, Golan.""A culture-hero, sir?""What Dr. Pelorat means," said Trevize, "is that he is a person towhom much was attributed, and who may have been an amalgamation of manymen in actual history, or who may be an invented person altogether."Daneel considered for a moment, and then said, quite calmly, "Thatis not so, sirs. Elijah Baley was a real man and he was one man. I donot know what your legends say of him, but in actual history, the Galaxymight never have been settled without him. In his honor, I did my bestto salvage what I could of Earth after it began to turn radioactive. Myfellow-robots were distributed over the Galaxy in an effort to influence aperson here a person there. At one time I maneuvered a beginning tothe recycling of Earth's soil. At another much later time, I maneuvereda beginning to the terraforming of a world circling the nearby star,now called Alpha. In neither case was I truly successful. I could neveradjust human minds entirely as I wished, for there was always the chancethat I might do harm to the various humans who were adjusted. I was bound,you see and am bound to this day by the Laws of Robotics.""Yes?"It did not necessarily take a being with Daneel's mental power todetect uncertainty in that monosyllable.
"The First Law," he said, "is this, sir: `A robot may not injurea human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come toharm.' The Second Law: `A robot must obey the orders given it byhuman beings except where such orders would conflict with the FirstLaw.' The Third Law: `A robot must protect its own existence, aslong as such protection does not conflict with the First or SecondLaw.' Naturally, I give you these laws in the approximationof language. In actual fact they represent complicated mathematicalconfigurations of our positronic brain-paths.""Do you find it difficult to deal with those Laws?""I must, sir. The First Law is an absolute that almost forbids the useof my mental talents altogether. When dealing with the Galaxy it is notlikely that any course of action will prevent harm altogether. Always,some people, perhaps many people, will suffer so that a robot must chooseminimum harm. Yet, the complexity of possibilities is such that it takestime to make that choice and one is, even then, never certain.""I see that," said Trevize.
"All through Galactic history," said Daneel, "I tried to amelioratethe worst aspects of the strife and disaster that perpetually madeitself felt in the Galaxy. I may have succeeded, on occasion, and tosome extent, but if you know your Galactic history, you will know thatI did not succeed often, or by much.""That much I know," said Trevize, with a wry smile.
"Just before Giskard's end, he conceived of a robotic law thatsuperseded even the first. We called it the `Zeroth Law' out of aninability to think of any other name that made sense. The Zeroth Law is:
`A robot may not injure humanity or, through inaction, allow humanityto come to harm.' This automatically means that the First Law mustbe modified to be: `A robot may not injure a human being, or, throughinaction, allow a human being to come to harm, except where that wouldconflict with the Zeroth Law.' And similar modifications must be madein the Second and Third Laws."Trevize frowned. "How do you decide what is injurious, or notinjurious, to humanity as a whole?""Precisely, sir," said Daneel. "In theory, the Zeroth Law was theanswer to our problems. In practice, we could never decide. A humanbeing is a concrete object. Injury to a person can be estimated andjudged. Humanity is an abstraction. How do we deal with it?""I don't know," said Trevize.
"Wait," said Pelorat. "You could convert humanity into a singleorganism. Gaia.""That is what I tried to do, sir. I engineered the founding ofGaia. If humanity could be made a single organism, it would becomea concrete object, and it could be dealt with. It was, however, notas easy to create a superorganism as I had hoped. In the first place,it could not be done unless human beings valued the superorganism morethan their individuality, and I had to find a mind-cast that would allowthat. It was a long time before I thought of the Laws of Robotics.""Ah, then, the Gaians are robots. I had suspected thatfrom the start.""In that case, you suspected incorrectly, sir. They are humanbeings, but they have brains firmly inculcated with the equivalentof the Laws of Robotics. They have to value life, really value it. And even after that was done, there remained a seriousflaw. A superorganism consisting of human beings only is unstable. Itcannot be set up. Other animals must be added then plants thenthe inorganic world. The smallest superorganism that is truly stable isan entire world, and a world large enough and complex enough to have astable ecology. It took a long time to understand this, and it is only inthis last century that Gaia was fully established and thatit became ready to move on toward Galaxia and, even so, that willtake a long time, too. Perhaps not as long as the road already traveled,however, since we now know the rules.""But you needed me to make the decision for you. Is that it,Daneel?""Yes, sir. The Laws of Robotics would not allow me, nor Gaia, to makethe decision and chance harm to humanity. And meanwhile, five centuriesago, when it seemed that I would never work out methods for gettinground all the difficulties that stood in the way of establishing Gaia,I turned to the second-best and helped bring about the development ofthe science of psychohistory.""I might have guessed that," mumbled Trevize. "You know, Daneel, I'mbeginning to believe you are twenty thousand years old.""Thank you, sir."Pelorat said, "Wait a while. I think I see something. Are you partof Gaia yourself, Daneel? Would that be how you knew about the dogs onAurora? Through Bliss?"Daneel said, "In a way, sir, you are correct. I am associated withGaia, though I am not part of it."Trevize's eyebrows went up. "That sounds like Comporellon, the worldwe visited immediately after leaving Gaia. It insists it is not part ofthe Foundation Confederation, but is only associated with it."Slowly, Daneel nodded. "I suppose that analogy is apt, sir. Ican, as an associate of Gaia, make myself aware of what Gaia is awareof in the person of the woman, Bliss, for instance. Gaia, however,cannot make itself aware of what I am aware of, so that I maintain myfreedom of action. That freedom of action is necessary until Galaxia iswell established."Trevize looked steadily at the robot for a moment, then said, "Anddid you use your awareness through Bliss in order to interfere withevents on our journey to mold them to your better liking?"Daneel sighed in a curiously human fashion. "I could not do much,sir. The Laws of Robotics always hold me back. And yet, I lightenedthe load on Bliss's mind, taking a small amount of added responsibility onmyself, so that she might deal with the wolves of Aurora and the Spacer onSolaria with greater dispatch and with less harm to herself. In addition,I influenced the woman on Comporellon and the one on New Earth, throughBliss, in order to have them look with favor on you, so that you mightcontinue on your journey."Trevize smiled, half-sadly. "I ought to have known it wasn't I."Daneel accepted the statement without its rueful self-deprecation. "Onthe contrary, sir," he said, "it was you in considerable part. Each of thetwo women looked with favor upon you from the start. I merely strengthenedthe impulse already present about all one can safely do under thestrictures of the Laws of Robotics. Because of those strictures andfor other reasons as well it was only with great difficulty that Ibrought you here, and only indirectly. I was in great danger at severalpoints of losing you.""And now I am here," said Trevize. "What is it you wantof me? To confirm my decision in favor of Galaxia?"Daneel's face, always expressionless, somehow managed to seemdespairing. "No, sir. The mere decision is no longer enough. I broughtyou here, as best I could in my present condition, for something farmore desperate. I am dying."102Perhaps it was because of the matter-of-fact way in whichDaneel said it; or perhaps because a lifetime of twenty thousand yearsmade death seem no tragedy to one doomed to live less than half a percentof that period; but, in any case, Trevize felt no stir of sympathy.
"Die? Can a machine die?""I can cease to exist, sir. Call it by whatever word you wish. Iam old. Not one sentient being in the Galaxy that was alive when Iwas first given consciousness is still alive today; nothing organic;nothing robotic. Even I myself lack continuity.""In what way?""There is no physical part of my body, sir, that has escapedreplacement, not only once but many times. Even my positronic brain hasbeen replaced on five different occasions. Each time the contents of myearlier brain were etched into the newer one to the last positron. Eachtime, the new brain had a greater capacity and complexity than the old,so that there was room for more memories, and for faster decision andaction. But ""But?""The more advanced and complex the brain, the more unstable it is,and the more quickly it deteriorates. My present brain is a hundredthousand times as sensitive as my first, and has ten million timesthe capacity; but whereas my first brain endured for over ten thousandyears, the present one is but six hundred years old and is unmistakablysenescent. With every memory of twenty thousand years perfectlyrecorded and with a perfect recall mechanism in place, the brain isfilled. There is a rapidly declining ability to reach decisions; an evenmore rapidly declining ability to test and influence minds at hyperspatialdistances. Nor can I design a sixth brain. Further miniaturization willrun against the blank wall of the uncertainty principle, and furthercomplexity will but assure decay almost at once."Pelorat seemed desperately troubled. "But surely, Daneel, Gaiacan carry on without you. Now that Trevize has judged and selectedGalaxia ""The process simply took too long, sir," said Daneel, as alwaysbetraying no emotion. "I had to wait for Gaia to be fully established,despite the unanticipated difficulties that arose. By the time a humanbeing Mr. Trevize was located who was capable of makingthe key decision, it was too late. Do not think, however, that I tookno measure to lengthen my life span. Little by little I have reducedmy activities, in order to conserve what I could for emergencies. WhenI could no longer rely on active measures to preserve the isolation ofthe Earth/moon system, I adopted passive ones. Over a period of years,the humaniform robots that have been working with me have been, one byone, called home. Their last tasks have been to remove all references toEarth in the planetary archives. And without myself and my fellow-robotsin full play, Gaia will lack the essential tools to carry through thedevelopment of Galaxia in less than an inordinate period of time.""And you knew all this," said Trevize, "when I made my decision?""A substantial time before, sir," said Daneel. "Gaia, of course,did not know.""But then," said Trevize angrily, "what was the use of carryingthrough the charade? What good has it been? Ever since my decision, Ihave scoured the Galaxy, searching for Earth and what I thought of as its`secret' not knowing the secret was you in order that I mightconfirm the decision. Well, I have confirmed it. I know now that Galaxiais absolutely essential and it appears to be all for nothing. Whycould you not have left the Galaxy to itself and me to myself?"Daneel said, "Because, sir, I have been searching for a way out,and I have been carrying on in the hope that I might find one. I thinkI have. Instead of replacing my brain with yet another positronic one,which is impractical, I might merge it with a human brain instead; ahuman brain that is not affected by the Three Laws, and will not onlyadd capacity to my brain, but add a whole new level of abilities aswell. That is why I have brought you here."Trevize looked appalled. "You mean you plan to merge a human braininto yours? Have the human brain lose its individuality so that you canachieve a two-brain Gaia?""Yes, sir. It would not make me immortal, but it might enable me tolive long enough to establish Galaxia.""And you brought me here for that? You want myindependence of the Three Laws and my sense of judgment made part ofyou at the price of my individuality? No!"Daneel said, "Yet you said a moment ago that Galaxia is essentialfor the welfare of the human ""Even if it is, it would take a long time to establish, and I wouldremain an individual in my lifetime. On the other hand, if it wereestablished rapidly, there would be a Galactic loss of individualityand my own loss would be part of an unimaginably greater whole. I would,however, certainly never consent to lose my individuality while the restof the Galaxy retains theirs."Daneel said, "It is, then, as I thought. Your brain would not mergewell and, in any case, it would serve a better purpose if you retainedan independent judgmental ability.""When did you change your mind? You said that it was for merging thatyou brought me here.""Yes, and only by using the fullest extent of my greatly diminishedpowers. Still, when I said, `That is why I have brought you here,'
please remember that in Galactic Standard, the word `you' representsthe plural as well as the singular. I was referring to all of you."Pelorat stiffened in his seat. "Indeed? Tell me then, Daneel,would a human brain that was merged with your brain share in all yourmemories all twenty thousand years of it, back to legendarytimes?""Certainly, sir."Pelorat drew a long breath. "That would fulfill a lifetime search,and it is something I would gladly give up my individuality for. Pleaselet me have the privilege of sharing your brain."Trevize asked softly, "And Bliss? What about her?"Pelorat hesitated for no more than a moment. "Bliss will understand,"he said. "She will, in any case, be better off without me aftera while."Daneel shook his head. "Your offer, Dr. Pelorat, is a generous one,but I cannot accept it. Your brain is an old one and it cannot survivefor more than two or three decades at best, even in a merger with myown. I need something else. See!" He pointed and said, "I've calledher back."Bliss was returning, walking happily, with a bounce to her steps.
Pelorat rose convulsively to his feet. "Bliss! Oh no!""Do not be alarmed, Dr. Pelorat," said Daneel. "I cannot useBliss. That would merge me with Gaia, and I must remain independent ofGaia, as I have already explained.""But in that case," said Pelorat, "who "And Trevize, looking at the slim figure running after Bliss, said,"The robot has wanted Fallom all along, Janov."103Bliss returned, smiling, clearly in a state of greatpleasure.
"We couldn't pass beyond the bounds of the estate," she said,"but it all reminded me very much of Solaria. Fallom, of course, isconvinced it is Solaria. I asked her if she didn't think that Daneelhad an appearance different from that of Jemby after all, Jembywas metallic and Fallom said, `No, not really.' I don't know whatshe meant by `not really.'"She looked across to the middle distance where Fallom was now playingher flute for a grave Daneel, whose head nodded in time. The soundreached them, thin, clear, and lovely.
"Did you know she took the flute with her when we left the ship?" askedBliss. "I suspect we won't be able to get her away from Daneel for quitea while."The remark was met with a heavy silence, and Bliss looked at the twomen in quick alarm. "What's the matter?"Trevize gestured gently in Pelorat's direction. It was up to him,the gesture seemed to say.
Pelorat cleared his throat and said, "Actually, Bliss, I think thatFallom will be staying with Daneel permanently.""Indeed?" Bliss, frowning, made as though to walk in Daneel'sdirection, but Pelorat caught her arm. "Bliss dear, you can't. He's morepowerful than Gaia even now, and Fallom must stay with him if Galaxia isto come into existence. Let me explain and, Golan, please correctme if I get anything wrong."Bliss listened to the account, her expression sinking into somethingclose to despair.
Trevize said, in an attempt at cool reason, "You see how it is,Bliss. The child is a Spacer and Daneel was designed and put togetherby Spacers. The child was brought up by a robot and knew nothing elseon an estate as empty as this one. The child has transductive powerswhich Daneel will need, and she will live for three or four centuries,which may be what is required for the construction of Galaxia."Bliss said, her cheeks flushed and her eyes moist, "I suppose thatthe robot maneuvered our trip to Earth in such a way as to make us passthrough Solaria in order to pick up a child for his use."Trevize shrugged. "He may simply have taken advantage of theopportunity. I don't think his powers are strong enough at the momentto make complete puppets of us at hyperspatial distances.""No. It was purposeful. He made certain that I would feel stronglyattracted to the child so that I would take her with me, rather thanleave her to be killed; that I would protect her even against you whenyou showed nothing but resentment and annoyance at her being with us."Trevize said, "That might just as easily have been your Gaian ethics,which Daneel could have strengthened a bit, I suppose. Come, Bliss,there's nothing to be gained. Suppose you could take Fallomaway. Where could you then take her that would make her as happy as sheis here? Would you take her back to Solaria where she would be killedquite pitilessly; to some crowded world where she would sicken and die;to Gaia, where she would wear her heart out longing for Jemby; on anendless voyage through the Galaxy, where she would think that everyworld we came across was her Solaria? And would you find a substitutefor Daneel's use so that Galaxia could be constructed?"Bliss was sadly silent.
Pelorat held out his hand to her, a bit timidly. "Bliss," he said,"I volunteered to have my brain fused with Daneel's. He wouldn't take itbecause he said I was too old. I wish he had, if that would have savedFallom for you."Bliss took his hand and kissed it. "Thank you, Pel, but the pricewould be too high, even for Fallom." She took a deep breath, and triedto smile. "Perhaps, when we get back to Gaia, room will be found in theglobal organism for a child for me and I will place Fallom in thesyllables of its name."And now Daneel, as though aware that the matter was settled, waswalking toward them, with Fallom skipping along at his side.
The youngster broke into a run and reached them first. She said toBliss, "Thank you, Bliss, for taking me home to Jemby again and for takingcare of me while weeeere on the ship. I shall always remember you." Thenshe flung herself at Bliss and the two held each other tightly.
"I hope you will always be happy," said Bliss. "I will remember you,too, Fallom dear," and released her with reluctance.
Fallom turned to Pelorat, and said, "Thank you, too, Pel, for lettingme read your book-films." Then, without an additional word, and after atrace of hesitation, the thin, girlish hand was extended to Trevize. Hetook it for a moment, then let it go.
"Good luck, Fallom," he muttered.
Daneel said, "I thank you all, sirs and madam, for what you havedone, each in your own way. You are free to go now, for your searchis ended. As for my own work, it will be ended, too, soon enough, andsuccessfully now."But Bliss said, "Wait, weeare not quite through. We don't know yetwhether Trevize is still of the mind that the proper future for humanityis Galaxia, as opposed to a vast conglomeration of Isolates."Daneel said, "He has already made that clear a while ago, madam. Hehas decided in favor of Galaxia."Bliss's lips tightened. "I'd rather hear that from him. Whichis it to be, Trevize?"Trevize said calmly, "Which do you want it to be, Bliss? If I decideagainst Galaxia, you may get Fallom back."Bliss said, "I am Gaia. I must know your decision, and its reason,for the sake of the truth and nothing else."Daneel said, "Tell her, sir. Your mind, as Gaia is aware, isuntouched."And Trevize said, "The decision is for Galaxia. There is no furtherdoubt in my mind on that point."104Bliss remained motionless for the time one might taketo count to fifty at a moderate rate, as though sheeeere allowing theinformation to reach all parts of Gaia, and then sheesaid, "Why?"Trevize said, "Listen to me. I knew from the start that there eere twopossible futures for humanity Galaxia, or else the Second Empire ofSeldon's Plan. And it seemed to me that those two possible futures eeremutually exclusive. We couldn't have Galaxia unless, for some reason,Seldon's Plan had some fundamental flaw in it.
"Unfortunately, I knew nothing about Seldon's Plan except for the twoaxioms on which it is based: one, that there be involved a large enoughnumber of human beings to allow humanity to be treated statistically asa group of individuals interacting randomly; and second, that humanitynot know the results of psychohistorical conclusions before the resultsare achieved.
"Since I had already decided in favor of Galaxia, I felt I must besubliminally aware of flaws in Seldon's Plan, and those flaws could onlybe in the axioms, which eere all I knew of the plan. Yet I could seenothing wrong with the axioms. I strove, then, to find Earth, feelingthat Earth could not be so thoroughly hidden for no purpose. I had tofind out what that purpose was.
"I had no real reason to expect to find a solution once I found Earth,but I was desperate and could think of nothing else to do. Andperhaps Daneel's desire for a Solarian child helped drive me.
"In any case, we finally reached Earth, and then the moon, and Blissdetected Daneel's mind, which he, of course, was deliberately reachingout to her. She described that mind as neither quite human nor quiterobotic. In hindsight, that proved to make sense, for Daneel's brain isfar advanced beyond any robot that ever existed, and would not be sensedas simply robotic. Neither would it be sensed as human, however. Peloratreferred to it as `something new' and that served as a trigger for`something new' of my own; a new thought.
"Just as, long ago, Daneel and his colleagueeeorked out a fourthlaw of robotics that was more fundamental than the other three, so Icould suddenly see a third basic axiom of psychohistory that was morefundamental than the other two; a third axiom so fundamental that noone ever bothered to mention it.
"Here it is. The two known axioms deal with human beings, and they arebased on the unspoken axiom that human beings are the only intelligentspecies in the Galaxy, and therefore the only organisms whose actionsare significant in the development of society and history. That is theunstated axiom: that there is only one species of intelligence in theGalaxy and that it is Homo Sapiens . If there were `something new,'
if there were other species of intelligence widely different in nature,then their behavior would not be described accurately by the mathematicsof psychohistory and Seldon's Plan would have no meaning. Do you see?"Trevize was almost shaking with the earnest desire to make himselfunderstood. "Do you see?" he repeated.
Pelorat said, "Yes, I see, but as devil's advocate, oldchap ""Yes? Go on.""Human beings are the only intelligences in theGalaxy.""Robots?" said Bliss. "Gaia?"Pelorat thought awhile, then said hesitantly , "Robots haveplayed no significant role in human history since the disappearanceof the Spacers. Gaia has played no significant role until veryrecently. Robots are the creation of human beings, and Gaia is thecreation of robots and both robots and Gala, insofar as theymust be bound by the Three Laws, have no choice but to yield to humanwill. Despite the twenty thousand years Daneel has labored, and the longdevelopment of Gaia, a single word from Golan Trevize, a human being,would put an end to both those labors and that development. It follows,then, that humanity is the only significant species of intelligence inthe Galaxy, and psychohistory remains valid.""The only form of intelligence in the Galaxy," repeated Trevizeslowly. "I agree. Yet we speak so much and so often of the Galaxy that itis all but impossible for us to see that this is not enough. The Galaxyis not the universe. There are other galaxies."Pelorat and Bliss stirred uneasily. Daneel listened with benigngravity, his hand slowly stroking Fallom's hair.
Trevize said, "Listen to me again. Just outside the Galaxy are theMagellanic Clouds, where no human ship has ever penetrated. Beyond thatare other small galaxies, and not very far away is the giant AndromedaGalaxy, larger than our own. Beyond that are galaxies by the billions.
"Our own Galaxy has developed only one species of an intelligence greatenough to develop a technological society, but what do we know of theother galaxies? Ours may be atypical. In some of the others perhapseven in all there may be many competing intelligent species,struggling with each other, and each incomprehensible to us. Perhapsit is their mutual struggle that preoccupies them, but what if, in somegalaxy, one species gains domination over the rest and then has time toconsider the possibility of penetrating other galaxies.
"Hyperspatially, the Galaxy is a point and so is all theUniverse. We have not visited any other galaxy, and, as far as we know,no intelligent species from another galaxy has ever visited us butthat state of affairs may end someday. And if the invaders come, theyare bound to find ways of turning some human beings against other humanbeings. We have so long had only ourselves to fight that we are usedto such internecine quarrels. An invader that finds us divided againstourselves will dominate us all, or destroy us all. The only true defenseis to produce Galaxia, which cannot be turned against itself and whichcan meet invaders with maximum power."Bliss said, "The picture you paint is a frightening one. Will we havetime to form Galaxia?"Trevize looked up, as though to penetrate the thick layer ofmoonrock that separated him from the surface and from space; as thoughto force himself to see those far distant galaxies, moving slowly throughunimaginable vistas of space.
He said, "In all human history, no other intelligence has impingedon us, to our knowledge. This need only continue a few more centuries,perhaps little more than one ten thousandth of the time civilizationhas already existed, and we will be safe. After all," and here Trevizefelt a sudden twinge of trouble, which he forced himself to disregard,"it is not as though we had the enemy already here and among us."And he did not look down to meet the brooding eyes ofFallom hermaphroditic, transductive, different as they rested,unfathomably, on him.
第二十一章 寻找结果
　　101
崔维兹感到自己完全无法置信。他已从那种奇异的欣快感中清醒过来——现在他怀疑，着陆前后所出现的那阵欣快感，就是此时站在眼前、自称机器人的这个人，不知如何注入他心灵的。
崔维兹仍凝视着前方。尽避此刻他拥有绝对清明的神智与未受干扰的心灵，还是惊讶得不知所措。他在惊讶状态中讲话，在惊讶状态中应答，因此几乎不知所云，也几乎不晓得对方讲些什么。因为，他正忙着打量这个明明是人类的人物，试图从他的举止或谈吐中，找出他是机器人的蛛丝马迹。
敝不得宝绮思刚才侦测到的讯息，崔维兹想，既不属于人类也不属于机器人，而是裴洛拉特所说的“新东西”。这样当然也好，因为这使崔维兹的思路转移到另一个更具启发性的管道——只不过这个管道现在也被其他思绪挤进了心灵的暗角。
宝绮思与菲龙已逛到别处去探险，虽然这是宝绮思的主意，但崔维兹注意到，那似乎是她与丹尼尔飞快交换一个眼色后的结果。菲龙本来拒绝离开，想要留在这个她坚称是健比的人物身边，但丹尼尔只不过严肃地吐出一个字，并举起一根指头，她便乖乖走开了。现在，只剩下崔维兹与裴洛拉特留在原处。
“她们不是基地人，阁下，”那机器人说，仿佛这句话就能解释一切。“其中一位是盖娅，另一位是个外世界人。”
柄器人引领他们来到一株树下，那里有几张式样简单的椅子，一路上崔维兹一言不发。机器人先招呼两位基地人就坐，等到他也以无异常人的动作坐下来，崔维兹才问道：“你真的是机器人吗？”
“真的是，阁下。”丹尼尔说。
裴洛拉特的脸孔显得喜孜孜的，他说：“在古老传说中，许多地方都提到一个叫丹尼尔的机器人，你是为了纪念他而取这个名字？”
“我就是那个机器人，”丹尼尔说：“那不是传说。”
“噢，不可能！”裴洛拉特说：“如果你就是那个机器人，你应该有好几千岁了。”
“两万岁。”丹尼尔以平静的口吻说。
裴洛拉特似乎不知所措，只好向崔维兹望去，后者带着些许怒意说：“如果你是机器人，我就要命令你说实话。”
“我不需要别人命令我说实话，阁下，我必须这么做。所以说，阁下，如今你面对着三种可能性。第一　，我是人类，而我向你们说谎：第二，我是机器人，被设定成相信自己有两万岁，事实上并非如此；第三，我是机器人，而我的确两万岁了。你必须自己决定接受哪一种。”
“继续谈下去自然会分晓。”崔维兹冶冶答道。“话说回来，我很难相信这里是月球的内部。不论是光线——”他说着抬起头来。头上的光线正是柔和、漫射的日光，虽然天上根本见不到太阳，甚趾蟋有没有天空都看不清楚。“——或着力似乎都不真实，这个世界的表面着力应该不到O.2g。”
“其实，正常的表面着力应该是0.16g，阁下，但此地的着力经过放大。你的太空船能产生着力感，不论在自由下落或加速时都维持不变，使用的便是这种人工着力。其他的能量需求，包括光能在内，也全都靠着力供应。不过若在方便使用太阳能的场合，我们就会使用太阳能。我们所需的物质皆由月球土壤供应，只有轻元素除外——例如氢、碳、氮，这些是月球所没有的。为了取得轻元素，我们偶尔得捕捉一颗彗星，一个世纪只要捕捉一颗，就足以满足我们的需求。”
“我想地球无法提供任何资源。”
“不幸正是如此，阁下。与人类的蛋白质一样，我们的正电子脑对放射性也很敏感。”
“你一直使用复数代名词，而我们眼前这座宅邸，似乎非常壮观、美丽、精致——至少外面看来如此。所以月球上应该还有其他生灵，人类？还是机器人？”
“是的，阁下。我们在月球上有完整的生态，存在于一个广大而错综复杂的洞穴中。然而此地的智慧生灵都是机器人，每个都跟我差不多，不过你一个也见不到。至于这座宅邸，它只供我个人使用，内外建筑完全仿照我在两万年前的住所。”
“你对那个住所的记忆钜细靡遗，是吗？”
“百分之百，阁下。我是在奥罗拉那个外世界出厂的，也在那里住饼一段日子——如今对我而言，那是多么短暂的时间。”
“就是那个有……”崔维兹说到一半突然打住。
“是的，阁下，就是那个有许多野狗的世界。”
“你知道那件事？”
“是的，阁下。”
“那么，如果你最初住在奥罗拉，又怎么会来到这里？”
“阁下，为了防止地球产生放射性，我在人类殖民银河之初就来到这里。当初跟我一起来的，还有个名叫吉斯卡的机器人，他能感知和调整人类的心灵。”
“跟宝绮思一样？”
“是的，阁下。就某方面而言，我们并未成功，吉斯卡甚至因故终止运作。然而，在临终之前，他设法让我具备了他的能力，并将整个银河，特别是地球，交给我来守护。”
“为什么特别是地球？”
“部分原因，是由于一位名叫伊利亚•贝莱的人，一位地球人。”
袭洛拉特兴奋地插嘴道：“他就是我提到过的那位文化英雄，葛兰。”
“文化英雄，阁下？”
“裴洛拉特博士的意思，”崔维兹说：“是说这个人集众多功绩于一身，可能是许多真实历史人物的综合体，也可能根本是个虚构人物。”
丹尼尔思索了一下，然后以相当平静的口吻说：“事实并非如此，阁下，伊利亚•贝莱真有其人，他也不是什么综合体。我不知道你们的传说如何描述他，但是在真实历史中，假使没有他这个人，银河可能始终未曾开拓。由于受到他的感召，在地球产生放射性之后，我尽全力抢救这个世界。我的机器人伙伴分布银河各处，适时地以渐进方式去影响人类。我曾策动过一个翻新地球土壤的计划，过了很久之后，我又策动了另一个计划，试图改造邻近一颗恒星所属的一个世界，那颗恒星现在叫阿尔发，这两项计划都不算真正成功。我从来不能全然随意调整人类的心灵，因为那些被我调整过的人，总是有可能受到伤害。我受到机器人三大法则的束缚，懂了吧——直到今天依然如此。”
“呃——”
即使一个普通人类或普通的机器人，完全欠缺丹尼尔的精神力量，也能察觉这个单音代表的疑问。
“第一法则，”他说：“阁下，是这样的：机器人不得伤害人类，也不得因为不采取行动而使人类受到伤害。第二法则是：除非违背第一法则，否则机器人必须服从人类的命令。第三法则是：在不违背第一法则及第二法则的情况下，机器人必须保护自身的存在。当然，我是用近似的语言对你们叙述这些法则，实际上，那是我们正电子脑回路中复杂的数学组态。”
“你发觉这些法则碍手碍脚吗？”
“必定如此，阁下。第一法则毫无转圆余地，几乎全然禁止我使用精神力量。在处理银河问题的过程中，不太可能每一步都不会造成伤害，总是有些人或许多人因而受苦，因此身为一个机器人，必须选择伤害最小的做法。然而，由于情势过于复杂，我必须花许多时间才能做出抉择，即使有了决定，也不可能绝对确定。”
“我能了解。”崔维兹说。
“在漫长的银河历史中，”丹尼尔说：“天灾人祸从未间断，我一直试图减轻这些灾祸造成的危害。某些时候，就某种秤谌而言，我可算是有些成就，但如果你熟悉你们银河的历史，就会知道我的成功例子不多，影响也不够深远。”
“这点我还知道。”崔维兹带着一抹苦笑说。
“我和吉斯卡悟出了另一个机器人法则，它甚趾箬驾第一法则之上。我们将它称为‘第零法则’，因为想不到有什么更合适的名称。第零法则的内容是：机器人不得伤害人类整体，也不得因为不采取行动而使人类整体受到伤害。这自然意味着第一法则必须修正为：除非违背第零法则，机器人不得伤害人类，也不得因为不采取行动而使人类受到伤害。而第二、第三法则也必须做类似的修正。”
崔维兹皱起眉头。“但对于人类整体而言，何者有害，何者无害，你又如何决定？”
“一点都没错，阁下。”丹尼尔说：“理论上，第零法则可以解决我们的问题；实际上，我们永远无法做出决定。人类是个具体的对象，对一个人构成的伤害不难估量判断；人类整体则是抽象的概念，我们应该如何对待处理呢？”
“我不知道。”崔维兹说。
“慢着，”裴洛拉特说：“你可将人类整体转变成单一有机体，例如盖娅。”
“这正是我试图进行的工作，阁下，盖娅的创建就是我一手策划的。假如能让人类整体形成单一的有机体，它就会变成具体的对象，这样便有办法处理了。然而，创造一个超有机体的工作，没有想像中那么简单。首先，除非每个人将这个超有机体看得比自身更着，否则绝对不可能成功。因此，我必须寻找一个适切的心灵模型，找了很久之后，我才想到机器人法则。”
“啊，那么盖娅人都是机器人。打从一开始我就怀疑这点。”
“这件事情，你的怀疑并不正确，阁下。他们都是人类，不过在他们大脑中，根深柢固地烙印着等同于机器人法则的概念。他们必须尊着生命，真正尊着——即使做到这一点，依然存在一个严着的缺陷。一个仅有人类的超有机体并不稳定，根本无从建立，其他的动物必须加进来——接着是植物，跟着是无机世界。真正稳定的最小超有机体，其实就是个完整的世界，唯有世界才足够庞大、足够复杂，得以拥有稳定的生态。我花了很久时间才了解这个道理，而直到最近一个世纪，盖娅才完全发展成功，准备向盖娅星系的目标迈进。纵使如此，那也需要很长的时间。不过，或许不会像来时路那般漫长，因为我们已经知道规则。”
“可是你需要我替你做出决定。对不对，丹尼尔？”
“是的，阁下。机器人法则不允许我，或是盖娅，做出为人类整体带来风险的决定。另一方面，五个世纪以前，我以为建立盖娅的着着困难绝不可能克服，于是我退而求其次，协助人类发展出心理史学这门科学。”
“我早就该猜到这一点。”崔维兹咕哝了一句，又说：“你知道吗，丹尼尔，我开始相信你的确有两万岁了。”
“谢谢你，阁下。”
裴洛拉特说：“等一等，我想我悟出了一件事。你自己是不是盖娅的一部分，丹尼尔？是不是因为这样，你才知道奥罗拉上有野狗群？经由宝绮思？”
丹尼尔说：“就某方面而言，阁下，你说得完全正确。我与盖娅的确有联系，不过我不是它的一部分。”
崔维兹扬起眉毛。“听来跟康普隆的情形差不多，就是我们离开盖娅后，首先造访的那个世界。康普隆坚持自己不是基地联邦的一部分，只不过跟联邦有某种联系。”
丹尼尔缓缓点了点头。“我想这个类比很恰当，阁下。由于与盖娅保持联系，我得以知晓盖娅所知晓的事物——例如经由盖娅的化身，宝绮思。然而，盖娅无从知晓我所知晓的事物，因此我得以保有行动自由。在盖娅星系实现之前，我有必要保有这种行动自由。”
崔维兹凝视这个机器人片刻，然后又说：“你是否利用你的精神感应，透过宝绮思，来干预我们这趟旅程中的际遇；好让我们依照你的理想行动？”
丹尼尔像人类一样，古里古怪地叹了一口气。“我做不了太多，阁下，机器人法则总是将我紧紧束缚。不过，我还是减呛笏宝绮思心中的着担，将少量的额外负担揽在自己身上。这样，她在面对奥罗拉的恶犬与索拉利的外世界人时，才能更当机立断，并减轻自己受到的伤害。此外，我还藉由宝绮思影响了两位女性，一位在康普隆，另一位在新地球上。我让她们对你充满好感，你才能继续你的旅程。”
崔维兹微笑了一下，有一半算是苦笑。“我早该知道不是由于我的缘故。”
丹尼尔未理会这句话中的自卑低调。“正好相反，阁下，”他说：“你扮演了着要的角色。那两位女性一开始就对你有好感，我只是提升了她们既有的冲动——在机器人法则的严格限制下，我顶多只能这么做。由于这些限制，以及其他一些因素，我必须历经干辛万苦，才能将你引领至此，而且必须以间接迂回的方式。前后好几次，我都险些失去了你。”
“现在我来了，”崔维兹说：“你想要我做什么？确定我选择盖娅星系是正确的决定？”
丹尼尔一向毫无表情的脸孔，此时竟然显得有些绝望。“并非如此，阁下，如今仅是决定已经不够。我以目前自己能力范围内最佳的方式引你前来，是为了一件比这急迫无数倍的事——我快要死了。”
102
彬许因为丹尼尔将这件事说得稀松平常；也或许因为他已经两万岁，对注定活不过其千分之五的凡人而言，他的死亡似乎不像是个悲剧，总而言之，这句话未激起崔维兹的同情心。
“死？机器会死吗？”
“我的存在可以终止，阁下，随便你用什么词汇称呼它。我已经老了，在我接受意识之初生活在银河各处的各个生灵，如今没有任何一个还活着，有机生命与机器人都没有。甚至我自己也无法不朽。”
“怎么说？”
“我身体中的有形零件，阁下，没有一个未曾更换，还不只换过一次，而是许多次。就连我的正电子脑，也在不同情况下更换过五次。每一次，原先脑中全部内容都蚀刻到新脑之中，连一个正电子也不放过。每一个新脑的容量与复杂度，都比原先的正电子脑增加许多倍，因此提供更多的记忆空间，使我能更迅速地决断与行动。可是——”
“可是？”
“越是先进、复杂的正电子脑就越不稳定，而且老化的速率越快。我现在的脑子与最初那个相比，灵敏度高出十万倍，容量高出千万倍。但是我的第一个脑子持续了一万年，而目前这个用了六百年便老朽不堪。过去两万年来每一项记忆的精确纪录，加上完美的回唤机制，将这个脑子全部装满。如今，我进行决策的能力急遽衰退，而衰退得更迅速的，则是在超空间距离外测试与影响心灵的能力。而且我也无法再设计第六个脑子。更进一步的微型化，势必遇到测不准原理的障壁；而复杂度再增高的结果，则一定会几乎立刻崩溃。”
裴洛拉特似乎感到极度困惑。“不过，丹尼尔，即使没有你，盖娅当然仍能继续发展。既然崔维兹已做出决断，选择了盖娅星系………一“但这个过程实在花了太长时间，阁下。”丹尼尔仍未显露任何情绪，“当初不论遇到多少始料未及的困难，我都必须等到盖娅发展成功。而等我找到崔维兹先生——一个能做出关键性抉择的人——那时已经太迟了。不过，别以为我没设法延长寿命，我一点一点减低自己的活动，将能力留着应付紧急状况。当我无法再依靠积极作为保持地／月双星的隔离状态时，我转而采取消极的做法。经过许多年，与我共事的人形机器人被我一一召回大本营，他们回来之前的最后一项任务，就是将各行星的地球档案取走。没有我自己与其他机器人的鼎力襄助，盖娅便失去建立盖娅星系最王要的工具，因此在未来很长一段时间内，盖娅星系都将无法建立。”
“而当我做出决定的时候，”崔维兹说：“你已经知道这一切。”
“许久以前便知道了，阁下。”丹尼尔说：“当然，盖娅并不知情。”
“那么，”崔维兹气冲冲地说：“跟我打这种哑谜有什么用？究竟有什么好处？在我做出决定后，我就在银河中东奔西跑，找寻地球以及我所认定的罚地球的秘密”——却不知道那个秘密就是你。而我那样做，是要为我的决定寻找佐证。好啦，我已经确定了，我现在知道盖娅星系是绝对必要的——看来我是白忙一场。你为何不能让银河自由发展，也让我自由自在？”
丹尼尔说：“因为，阁下，我一直在寻访一个解决之道，而且始终抱着希望坚持下去。如今，我认为已经找到答案。我放弃了再换个正电子脑的念头，因为那是不切实际的，反之，我准备将我的脑子与人脑合并。一个不受机器人法则影响的人脑，不但可以增加我的脑容量，还能使我的能力达到一个新境界。我引领阁下来到此地，就是为了这个缘故。”
崔维兹显得惊骇不已。“你的意思是，你计划要将一个人脑并入你的脑中？让那个人脑丧失独立性，以构成一个双脑的盖娅？”
“是的，阁下。这样虽然不能使我永生，却可能让我有足够的时间建立盖娅星系。”
“而你引我来到这里，就是为了这个目的？你要我牺牲独立性，成为你的一部分，这样你就能像我一样不理会三大法则，还能拥有我的判断力？办不到！”
丹尼尔说：“然而你刚才说过，盖娅星系对人类福祉是绝对必要……”
“即使如此，它也需要花很长的时间建立，因此在我有生之年，我应该能一直维持独立性。反之，若是它很快就建立起来，整个银河都将失去独立性，相形之下，我个人的损失形同沧海一粟。可是，当整个银河还保有自我的时候，我绝不要丧失自己的独立性。”
丹尼尔说：“那么，这与我预料的一样。你的大脑不适于与我合并，而且，你若是保有独立判断的能力，无论如何将更有助益。”
“你什么时候改变心意的？你说你引我到这里来，就是为了进行合并。”
“是的，而且我将大不如前的能力尽数施展，才达成了这个目的。话说回来，我刚才说的是：‘我引领阁下来到此地，就是为了这个缘故。’请记住，在银河标准语中，‘阁下’不但代表单数，也可以代表复数，我指的是你们全体。”
裴洛拉特僵凝在坐位上。“真的吗？请告诉我，丹尼尔，人脑和你的脑子合并俊，可以分享你全部的记忆吗？两万年来所有的记忆，一直上溯到传说时代？”
“当然，阁下。”
裴洛拉特深深吸了一口气。“那将实现我一生的梦想，为这种事我甘愿放弃独立性。请把这个权利让给我，让我分享你的脑子。”
崔维兹轻声问道：“宝绮思呢？她怎么办？”
裴洛拉特只迟疑了一下子。“宝绮思缓舐解的。”他说：“反正没有我，她的日子会更好过——一段时间之后。”
丹尼尔却摇了摇头。 “你的提议非常慷慨，裴洛拉特博士，可是我无法接受。你的脑子太老了，顶多只能再持续二、三十年，即使跟我自己的合并，也无法延续它的寿命。我需要另一个人选——看！”他伸手一指，说：“我把她叫回来了。”
宝绮思正踩着轻快的步伐，愉悦地朝这里走来。
裴洛拉特像是抽筋一样蹦起来。“宝绮思！不成！”
“不用惊慌，裴洛拉特博士。”丹尼尔说：“我不能用宝绮思，否则我将与盖娅合并，而我已经解释过，我必须独立于盖娅之外。”
“可是这样的话，”裴洛拉特说：“谁……”
崔维兹望着跑在宝绮思后面的那个小小身形，脱口而出：“这机器人打一开始就只想要菲龙，詹诺夫。”
103
宝绮思微笑着走回来，显然心情万分愉悦。
“我们无法走出这块属地的范围，”她说：“不过这里处处使我想起索拉利，菲龙当然确信这里就是索拉利。我问过她，难道她没想到丹尼尔的外表和健比不同——毕竟，健比全身裹着金属。菲龙却说：‘下，不见得。’我不知道她说的‘不见得’是什么意思。”
她向站在不远处的菲龙望去，菲龙正在为表情严肃的丹尼尔演奏笛子，丹尼尔和着拍子频频点头。笛声也传到他们这里，听来是如此纤细、清晰而美妙。
“你们知不知道，当我们离开太空船的时候，她把笛子也带在身上？”宝绮思问。“我猜会有好一阵子，我们无法将她从丹尼尔身边拉开。”
必答这句话的是凝着的沉默，宝绮思突然紧张起来，望着两位男士说：“怎么了？”
崔维兹朝裴洛拉特一指，似乎是说由他负责解释。
于是裴洛拉特清了清喉咙，说：“事实上，宝绮思，我想菲龙会永远留在丹尼尔身边。”
“真的？”宝绮思皱着眉头，似乎准备走向丹尼尔，裴洛拉特却抓住了她的手臂。“宝绮思吾爱，你不能去。即使是现在，他的能力也比盖娅强大，而且菲龙若不留下，盖娅星系永远无法实现。让我来解释——葛兰，如果我说错了什么，请你随时纠正。”
宝绮思听着裴洛拉特的叙述，脸色越来越难看，最后露出近乎绝望的神情。
崔维兹试图诉诸理性，他说：“你看得出这个道理，宝绮思。这孩子是外世界人，丹尼尔则是由外世界人设计制造的：这孩子由机器人带大，生长在一个和此地同样空旷的属地，对外界的一切一无所知。这孩子拥有转换能量的本事，丹尼尔需要借着这项异禀，而且她的寿命长达三、四个世纪，也许恰好是建立盖娅星系所需的时间。”
宝绮思双颊泛红，泪汪汪地说：“我猜，我们这趟前往地球的旅程，是那个机器人一手策划的。他还故意让我们经过索拉利，以便带个孩子给他。”
崔维兹耸了耸肩。“他也许只是见机行事。我不信他的能力现在仍那么强大，在超空间距离外，还能将我们变成百依百顺的傀儡。”
“不，那是计划好的。他使我对这孩于产生强烈的好感，确定我会把她带在身边，不会眼睁睁看她遭到杀害。他也知道，虽然你对于带她同行这件事，表现的始终是愤怒和厌烦，但我为了保护她，会不惜和你发生冲突。”
崔维兹说：“你那样做，我想，可能只是出于你们盖娅的道德感，而丹尼尔可使它再增强一点。算啦，宝绮思，没有更好的结局了。假如你能将菲龙带走，你要带她到哪里去，才能使她像在此地这般快乐？你准备带她回索拉利，让她惨遭无情的杀害吗？带她到某个拥挤的世界，让她水土不服因病而死？带她去盖娅，让她因为想念健比而肝肠寸断？带她永远在银河中流浪，让她以为我们遇到的每个世界，都是她的故乡索拉利？此外，你能替丹尼尔找到建立盖娅星系的替代人选吗？”
宝绮思伤心得说不出话来。
裴洛拉特一只手伸向她，显得有点心虚的样子。“宝绮思，”他说：“我曾自愿让丹尼尔和我的脑子合并，他拒绝接受，因为他说我太老了。我多么希望他能接受，如果这样能让菲龙留在你身边。”
宝绮思抓住他的手吻了一下。“谢谢你，裴，不过那样代价未免太高了，即使是为了菲龙。”她深深吸了口气，又勉强挤出一丝笑容。“也许，等我们回到盖娅，可以在那个全球有机体中，找到一个位置容纳我自己的孩子——我会把‘菲龙’放在孩子的名字里。”
现在，丹尼尔好像知道事情已顺利解决，正朝他们走过来，菲龙则跟在他身边蹦蹦跳跳。
然后，那孩子开始奔跑，抢先跑到他们面前。她对宝绮思说：“宝绮思，谢谢你带我回家和健比团圆，也谢谢你在太空船上照顾我，我永远不会忘记你。”说完她就投入宝绮思怀里，两人紧紧互相拥抱。
“我希望你永远快乐。”宝绮思说：“我也会永远记得你，亲爱的菲龙。”然后依依下舍地将她松开。
菲龙转向裴洛拉特，说：“我也要谢谢你，裴，谢谢你让我读你的胶卷书。”然后她稍微迟疑了一下，什么话也没说，将纤细秀丽的手掌伸向崔维兹，崔维兹握了一会儿才松开。
“祝你好运，菲龙。”他喃喃说道。
丹尼尔说：“我也要向诸位致意，谢谢你们各自所做的努力。现在你们随时可以离去，因为你们的探索已经结束。至于我自己的工作，同样将很快结束，而且必能成功。”
宝绮思却说：“慢着，我们还有一事未了。我们还不知道，崔维兹是否仍然认为人类的理想未来是盖娅星系，而不是孤立体组成的庞大混合体。”
丹尼尔说：“刚才，他已经说得很清楚，女士，他已经决定支持盖娅星系。”
宝绮思噘了一下嘴。“我宁愿听他亲口说——你的决定是什么，崔维兹？”
崔维兹平静地说：“你希望我如何决定，宝绮思？假使我决定反对盖娅星系，你就有机会把菲龙要回来。”
宝绮思说：“我是盖娅，我必须知道你的决定和背后的原因。这是为了了解真相，没有任何其他目的。”
丹尼尔说：“告诉她吧，阁下，盖娅晓得你的心灵未受干扰。”
于是崔维兹说：“我的决定是支持盖娅星系，这一点，我心中再无疑虑。”
104
宝绮思静默了好一阵子，时间大约可以用普通速度从一数到五十，彷佛是要让这个讯息传到盖娅各个部分。然后她才说：“为什么？”
崔维兹答道：“听我说。我一开始就知道人类的未来有两种可能——若非盖娅星系，便是谢顿计划中的第二帝国，而我觉得这两个可能的未来是互斥的。除非由于某种原因，谢顿计划具有根本缺陷，否则不会有盖娅星系的出现。
“不幸的是，除了它所根据的两个公设，我对谢顿计划的内容一无所知。第一个公设是，涉及的人口数目必须足够庞大，使得整体可被视为一群随机互动的个体，因而能以统计方法处理。第二个公设是，在目标尚未达成之前，人类不得预知心理史学的结论。
“由于我已决定支持盖娅星系，我觉得自己一定下意识地察觉到谢顿计划的漏洞，而漏洞只可能在公设上，因为那是我对该计划唯一知晓的部分。然而，我又看不出那两个公设有任何问题。因此我努力寻找地球，我觉得地球不会无缘无故隐藏得那么彻底，我必须找出它躲藏起来的目的。
“我没有真正指望在我发现地球之后，就能得到一个满意的答案。可是我走投无路，根本想不到其他的办法——不过我受到的驱策，也可能来自需要一个索拉利儿童的丹尼尔。
“无论如何，我们终于抵达地球附近，又飞到月球上空。不久宝绮思侦测到丹尼尔的心灵，当然，当时他故意将心灵向宝绮思敞开。她将这个心灵描述为并非完全是人类，也不完全是机器人。现在看来，这种说法很有道理，因为丹尼尔的脑子远远超越任何机器人，感测起来并非只是机器人的心灵，不过仍有异于人类。裴洛拉特将它称为‘新东西’，这种说法触发了我自己的一点新东西，也就是一个新的想法。
“正如同许久以前，丹尼尔和同伴悟出了更基本的第四个机器人法则，我忽然想到心理史学还有第三个公设。它比其他两个公设基本得多，因此过去人人都懒得提到它。
“听好了，已知的两个公设都以人类为对象，两者皆植基于一个未曾言明的公设：人类是银河中唯一的智慧物种，因此唯有人类这种生物的行动，在发展社会与历史的过程中举足轻着。这个隐性公设可归纳如下：银河中只有一种智慧物种，亦即现代智人。假使银河中有什么新东西，假使那是一种本质回异的智慧物种，其行为便无法以心理史学的数学精确描述，谢顿计划因此就会变得毫无意义。你们懂了吗？”
崔维兹极其希望别人了解这番话，激动得几乎全身发抖。“你们懂了吗？”他又着复一次。
裴洛拉特说：“懂，我懂了。但是身为一个吹毛求疵的人，老弟——一“什么？继续啊。”
“在整个银河中，人类正是唯一的智慧物种。”
“机器人呢？”宝绮思说：“盖娅呢？”
裴洛拉特思索了一下，然后以迟疑的口吻说：“在人类历史上，自从外世界人消失后，机器人就没扮演过着要角色。而盖娅在最近之前也未曾扮演过着要角色。机器人是人类创造的，盖娅是机器人创造的——而机器人与盖娅两者，既然都受到三大法则的限制，除了屈服于人类的意志，根本就没有其他选择。纵使丹尼尔奋斗了两万年，纵使盖娅发展了那么长的时间，但只要葛兰•崔维兹这个人类说的一句话，就缓螈刻葬送两者无数的心血。由此可知，人类仍是银河中唯一的着要智慧物种，因此心理史学依然有效。”
“银河中唯一的着要智慧物种——”崔维兹慢慢着复着这句话。“这点我同意。可是我们一天到晚将银河挂在嘴边，所以几乎无法察觉这样考虑并不周详。银河不等于宇宙，宇宙中还有许多其他的星系。”
裴洛拉特与宝绮思不安地挪动了一下。丹尼尔则专心聆听，严肃的表情透出几许祥和，一只手缓缓抚着菲龙的头发。
崔维兹继续道：“听我说下去。银河近旁就有麦哲伦云，没有任何人类的船舰曾到过那里。再往外一点还有许多小型星系，而巨大的仙女座星系距离也不太远，它比我们的银河系还要大。除此之外，宇宙间另有数十亿个星系。
“我们的银河中，只发展出一种有能力建立科技社会的智慧物种，但我们对其他星系了解多少？我们这个星系可能是个特例，也许在某些星系，甚至所有其他星系中，存在着许多互竞的智慧物种，彼此间一直在明争暗斗，而每一种我们都毫无概念。大概因为他们忙着彼此斗争，因而无暇顾及其他，但假如在某个星系中，某种物种取得了领导地位，而有时间考虑侵入其他星系的可能性，那又会怎么样？
“就超空间而言，银河只是一个点——整个宇宙也是如此。我们从未造访过其他星系，而且根据我们的了解，也没有其他星系的智慧物种来过我们的银河——但这种局面也许有一天会改变。若有侵略者来到，他们必定能找到挑拨人类内斗的方法。长久以来，我们的敌人都是自己人，我们习惯了这种自相残杀。处于如此四分五裂的状况，我们必将被侵略者完全征服，或是被尽数消灭。唯一真正的防御战略，就是形成无法由内部突破的盖娅星系，遇到侵略者来犯时，我们才能发挥最大的力量。”
宝绮思说：“你描绘的情景非常可怕，我们还来得及建立盖娅星系吗？”
崔维兹抬头向上望，视线仿佛穿透厚层的月岩，直达月球表面与星际空间；彷佛努力想要见到无数正在不可思议的鸿蒙太空中缓缓运动的遥远星系。
他说：“据我们所知，在古往今来的人类历史中，从未有其他智慧生物侵犯我们。这种情形只需再持续数个世纪，也许只要人类文明历史万分之一的时间，我们便能高枕无忧。毕竟，”讲到这里，崔维兹突然感到一阵痛心的忧虑，但他强迫自己置之不理。“此时此刻，似乎还没有敌人潜伏在我们之间。”
菲龙——这个懂得转换能量、雌雄同体的异类，此刻正望着他，眼神深不可测。崔维兹并未低头迎向那对出神的目光。
　　【全文完】
