

9 

THE EVIDENCE OF MR. HARDMAN 

The last of the first-class passengers to be interviewed, Mr. Hardman, was the big flamboyant American who had shared a table with the Italian and the valet. 

He wore a somewhat loud check suit, a pink shirt, and a flashy tie-pin, and was rolling something round his tongue as he entered the dining-car. He had a big, fleshy, coarse-featured face, with a good-humoured expression. 

“Morning, gentlemen,” he said. “What can I do for you?” 

“You have heard of this murder, Mr.—er—Hardman?” 

“Sure.” He shifted the chewing gum deftly. 

“We are of necessity interviewing all the passengers on the train.” 

“That’s all right by me. Guess that’s the only way to tackle the job.” 

Poirot consulted the passport lying in front of him. 

“You are Cyrus Bethman Hardman, United States subject, forty-one years of age, travelling salesman for typewriting ribbons?” 

“O.K. That’s me.” 

you are travelling from Stamboul to Paris?” 

“That’s so.” 

“Reason?” 

“Business.” 

“Do you always travel first-class, Mr. Hardman?” 

“Yes, sir. The firm pays my travelling expenses. “ He winked. 

“Now, Mr. Hardman, we come to the events of last night.” 

The American nodded. 

“What can you tell us about the matter?” 

“Exactly nothing at all.” 

“Ah, that is a pity. Perhaps, Mr. Hardman, you will tell us exactly what you did last night from dinner onwards?” 

For the first time the American did not seem ready with his reply. At last he said: “Excuse me, gentlemen, but just who are you? Put me wise.” 

“This is M. Bouc, a director of the Compagnie des Wagons Lits. This gentleman is the doctor who examined the body.” 

“And you yourself?” 

“I am Hercule Poirot. I am engaged by the company to investigate this matter.” 

“I’ve heard of you,” said Mr. Hardman. He reflected a minute or two longer. “Guess I’d better come clean.”  

“It will certainly be advisable for you to tell us all you know,” said Poirot drily. 

“You’d have said a mouthful if there was anything I did know. But I don’t. I know nothing at all—just as I said. But I ought to know something. That’s what makes me sore. I ought to.” 

“Please explain, Mr. Hardman.” 

Mr. Hardman sighed, removed the chewing gum, and dived into a pocket. At the same time his whole personality seemed to undergo a change. He became less of a stage character and more of a real person. The resonant nasal tones of his voice became modified. 

“That passport’s a bit of bluff,” he said. “That’s who I really am.” 

Poirot scrutinised the card flipped across to him. M. Bouc peered over his shoulder. Poirot knew the name as that of one of the best-known and most reputable private detective agencies in New York. 

“Now, Mr. Hardman,” he said, “let us hear the meaning of this.” 

“Sure. Things came about this way. I’d come over to Europe trailing a couple of crooks—nothing to do with this business. The chase ended in Stamboul. I wired the Chief and got his instructions to return, and I would have been making my tracks back to little old New York when I got this.” 

He pushed across a letter. 

THE TOKATLLAN HOTEL 

Dear Sir: You have been pointed out to me as an operative of the McNeil Detective Agency. Kindly report at my suite at four o’clock this afternoon. 

S. E. RATCHETT “Eh bien?”  

“I reported at the time stated, and Mr. Ratchett put me wise to the situation. He showed me a couple of letters he’d got.” 

“He was alarmed?” 

“Pretended not to be, but he was rattled, all right. He put up a proposition to me. I was to travel by the same train as he did to Parrus and see that nobody got him. Well, gentlemen, I did travel by the same train, and in spite of me, somebody did get him. I certainly feel sore about it. It doesn’t look any too good for me.” 

“Did he give you any indication of the line you were to take?” 

“Sure. He had it all taped out. It was his idea that I should travel in the compartment alongside his. Well, that blew up right at the start. The only place I could get was berth No. 16, and I had a job getting that. I guess the conductor likes to keep that compartment up his sleeve. But that’s neither here nor there. When I looked all round the situation, it seemed to me that No. 16 was a pretty good strategic position. There was only the dining-car in front of the Stamboul sleepingcar, and the door onto the platform at the front end was barred at night. The only way a thug could come was through the rear-end door to the platform, or along the train from the rear, and in either case he’d have to pass right by my compartment.” 

“You had no idea, I suppose, of the identity of the possible assailant?” 

“Well, I knew what he looked like. Mr. Ratchett described him to me.” 

“What?” 

All three men leaned forward eagerly. 

Hardman went on. 

“A small man—dark—with a womanish kind of voice. That’s what the old man said. Said, too, that he didn’t think it would be the first night out, More likely the second or third.” 

“He knew something,” said M. Bouc. 

“He certainly knew more than he told his secretary,” commented Poirot thoughtfully. “Did he tell you anything about this enemy of his? Did he, for instance, say why his life was threatened?” 

“No, he was kinda reticent about that part of it. just said the fellow-was out for his blood and meant to get it.” 

“A small man—dark—with a womanish voice,” repeated Poirot thoughtfully. Then, fixing a sharp glance on Hardman, he asked: “You knew who he really was, of course?” 

“Which, Mister?” 

“Ratchett. You recognised him?” 

“I don’t get you.” 

“Ratchett was Cassetti, the Armstrong murderer.” 

Mr. Hardman gave vent to a prolonged whistle.  

“That certainly is some surprise!” he said. “Yes, sir! No, I didn’t recognise him. I was away out West when that case came on. I suppose I saw photos of him in the papers, but I wouldn’t recognise my own mother when a newspaper photographer got through with her. Well, I don’t doubt that a few people had it in for Cassetti all right.” 

Do you know of anyone connected with the Armstrong case who answers to that description: small—dark—womanish voice?” 

Hardman reflected a minute or two. “It’s hard to say. Pretty nearly everyone connected with that case is dead.” 

“There was the girl who threw herself out of the window, remember.” 

“Sure. That’s a good point, that. She was a foreigner of some kind. Maybe she had some Wop relations. But you’ve got to remember that there were other cases besides the Armstrong one. Cassetti had been running this kidnapping stunt for some time. You can’t concentrate on that only.” 

Ah, but we have reason to believe that this crime is connected with the Armstrong case.” 

Mr. Hardman cocked an inquiring eye. Poirot did not respond. The American shook his head. 

“I can’t call to mind anybody answering that description in the Armstrong case,” he said slowly. “But of course I wasn’t in it and didn’t know much about it.” 

“Well, continue your narrative, Mr. Hardman.” 

“There’s very little to tell. I got my sleep in the daytime and stayed awake on the watch at night. Nothing suspicious happened the first night. Last night was the same, as far as I was concerned. I had my door a little ajar and watched. No stranger passed.” 

“You are sure of that, Mr. Hardman?” 

“I’m plumb certain. Nobody got on that train from outside, and nobody came along the train from the rear carriages. I’ll take my oath on that.” 

“Could you see the conductor from your position?” 

“Sure. He sits on that little seat almost flush with my door.” 

“Did he leave that seat at all after the train stopped at Vincovci?” 

“That was the last station? Why, yes, he answered a couple of bells—that would be just after the train came to a halt for good. Then, after that, he went past me into the rear coach—was there about a quarter of an hour. There was a bell ringing like mad and he came back running. I stepped out into the corridor to see what it was all about—felt a mite nervous, you understand—but it was only the American dame. She was raising hell about something or other, I grinned. Then he went on to another compartment and came back and got a bottle of mineral water for someone. After that he settled down in his seat till he went up to the far end to  

make somebody’s bed up. I don’t think he stirred after that until about five o’clock 

this morning.” 

“Did he doze off at all?” 

“That I can’t say. He may have.” 

Poirot nodded. Automatically his hands straightened the papers on the table. He picked up the official card once more. 

“Be so good as just to initial this,” he said. 

The other complied. 

“There is no one, I suppose, who can confirm your story of your identity, Mr. Hardman?” 

“On this train? Well, not exactly. Unless it might be young MacQueen. I know him well enough—I’ve seen him in his father’s office in New York. But that’s not to say he’ll remember me from a crowd of other operatives. No, Mr. Poirot, you’ll have to wait and cable New York when the snow lets up. But it’s O.K. I’m not telling the tale. Well, so long, gentlemen. Pleased to have met you, Mr. Poirot.” 

Poirot proffered his cigarette case. “But perhaps you prefer a pipe?” 

“Not me.” He helped himself, then strode briskly off. 

The three men looked at each other. 

“You think he is genuine?” asked Dr. Constantine. 

“Yes, yes. I know the type. Besides, it is a story that would be very easy to disprove.” 

“He has given us a piece of very interesting evidence,” said M. Bouc. 

“Yes, indeed.” 

“A small man—dark—with a high-pitched voice,” said M. Bouc thoughtfully. 

“A description which applies to no one on the train,” said Poirot.  

10 

THE EVIDENCE OF THE ITALIAN 

“And now,” said Poirot with a twinkle in his eye, “we will delight the heart of M. Bouc and see the Italian.” 

Antonio Foscarelli came into the dining-car with a swift, cat-like tread. His face beamed. It was a typical Italian face, sunny-looking and swarthy. 

He spoke French well and fluently with only a slight accent. 

“Your name is Antonio Foscarelli?” 

“Yes, Monsieur.” 

“You are, I see, a naturalised American subject?” 

The American grinned. “Yes, Monsieur. It is better for my business.” 

“You are an agent for Ford motor cars?” 

“Yes, you see—” 

A voluble exposition followed. At the end of it anything that the three men did not know about Foscarelli’s business methods, his journeys, his income, and his opinion of the United States and most European countries seemed a negligible factor. This was not a man who had to have information dragged from him. It gushed out. 

His good-natured, childish face beamed with satisfaction as, with a last eloquent gesture, he paused and wiped his forehead with a handkerchief. 

“So you see,” he said. “I do big business. I am up to date. I understand salesmanship!” 

“You have been in the United States, then, for the last ten years on and off.” 

Yes, Monsieur. Ah! well do I remember the day I first took the boat—to go to America, so far away! My mother, my little sister—” 

Poirot cut short the flood of reminiscence. 

“During your sojourn in the United States, did you ever come across the deceased?” 

“Never. But I know the type. Oh! yes.” He snapped his fingers expressively. “It is very respectable, very well-dressed, but underneath it is all wrong. Out of my experience I should say he was the big crook. I give you my opinion for what it is worth.” 

“Your opinion is quite right,” said Poirot drily. “Ratchett was Cassetti, the kidnapper.” 

“What did I tell you? I have learned to be very acute—to read the face. It is necessary. Only in America do they teach you the proper way to sell. I—”  

“You remember the Armstrong case?” 

“I do not quite remember. The name, yes? It was a little girl, a baby, was it not?” 

“Yes, a very tragic affair.” 

The Italian seemed the first person to demur to this view. 

“Ah! well, these things they happen,” he said philosophically, “in a great civilisation such as America—” 

Poirot cut him short. “Did you ever come across any members of the Armstrong family?” 

“No, I do not think so. It is difficult to say. I will give you some figures. Last year alone, I sold—” 

“Monsieur, pray confine yourself to the point.” 

The Italian’s hands flung themselves out in a gesture of apology. “A thousand pardons.” 

“Tell me, if you please, your exact movements last night from dinner onwards.” 

“With pleasure. I stay here as long as I can. It is more amusing. I talk to the American gentleman at my table. He sells typewriter ribbons. Then I go back to my compartment. It is empty. The miserable John Bull who shares it with me is away attending to his master. At last he comes back—very long face as usual. He will not talk—says yes and no. A miserable race, the English—not sympathetic. He sits in the corner, very stiff, reading a book, Then the conductor comes and makes our beds.” 

“Nos. 4 and 5,” murmured Poirot. 

“Exactly—the end compartment. Mine is the upper berth. I get up there. I smoke and read. The little Englishman has, I think, the toothache. He gets out a little bottle of stuff that smells very strong. He lies in bed and groans. Presently I sleep. Whenever I wake I hear him groaning.” 

“Do you know if he left the carriage at all during the night?” 

“I do not think so. That, I should hear. The light from the corridor—one wakes up automatically thinking it is the customs examination at some frontier.” 

“Did he ever speak of his master? Ever express any animus against him?” 

“I tell you he did not speak. He was not sympathetic. A fish.” 

“You smoke, you say—a pipe, cigarettes, cigar?” 

“Cigarettes only.” 

Poirot proffered one, which he accepted. 

“Have you ever been to Chicago?” inquired M. Bouc. 

“Oh! yes—a fine city—but I know best New York, Cleveland, Detroit. You have been to the States? No? You should go. It—” 

Poirot pushed a sheet of paper across to him. 

“If you will sign this, and put your permanent address, please.” 

The Italian wrote with a flourish. Then he rose, his smile as engaging as ever.  

“That is all? You do not require me further? Good day to you, Messieurs. I wish we could get out of the snow. I have an appointment in Milan.” He shook his head sadly. “I shall lose the business.” He departed. 

Poirot looked at his friend. 

“He has been a long time in America,” said M. Bouc, “and he is an Italian, and Italians use the knife! And they are great liars! I do not like Italians.” 

“.a se voit,” said Poirot with a smile “Well, it may be that you are right, but I will point out to you, my friend, that there is absolutely no evidence against the man.” 

“And what about the psychology? Do not Italians stab?” 

“Assuredly,” said Poirot. “Especially in the heat of a quarrel. But this—this is a different kind of crime. I have the little idea, my friend, that this is a crime very carefully planned and staged. It is a far-sighted, long-headed crime. it is not—how shall I express it?—a Latin crime. It is a crime that shows traces of a cool, resourceful, deliberate brain—I think an Anglo-Saxon brain—” 

He picked up the last two passports. 

“Let us now,” he said, “see Miss Mary Debenham.”  

11 

THE EVIDENCE OF MISS DEBENHAM 

When Mary Debenham entered the dining-car she confirmed Poirot’s previous estimate of her. She was very neatly dressed in a little black suit with a French grey shirt, and the smooth waves of her dark head were neat and unruffled. Her manner was as calm and unruffled as her hair. 

She sat down opposite Poirot and M. Bouc and looked at them inquiringly. 

“Your name is Mary Hermione Debenham and you are twenty-six years of age?” began Poirot. 

“Yes.” 

“English?” 

“Yes.” 

“Will you be so kind, Mademoiselle, as to write down your permanent address on this piece of paper?” 

She complied. Her writing was clear and legible. 

“And now, Mademoiselle, what have you to tell us of the affair last night?” 

“I am afraid I have nothing to tell you. I went to bed and slept.” 

“Does it distress you very much, Mademoiselle, that a crime has been committed on this train?” 

The question was clearly unexpected. Her grey eyes widened a little. 

“I don’t quite understand you?” 

“It was a perfectly simple question that I asked you, Mademoiselle. I will repeat it. Are you very much distressed that a crime should have been committed on this train?” 

“I have not really thought about it from that point of view. No, I cannot say that I am at all distressed.” 

“A crime—it is all in the day’s work to you, eh?” 

“It is naturally an unpleasant thing to have happen,” said Mary Debenham quietly. 

“You are very Anglo-Saxon, Mademoiselle. Vous n’éprouvez pas d’émotion.” 

She smiled a little. “I am afraid I cannot have hysterics to prove my sensibility. After all, people die every day.” 

“They die, yes. But murder is a little more rare.” 

“Oh! certainly.” 

“You were not acquainted with the dead man?” 

“I saw him for the first time when lunching here yesterday.”  

“And how did he strike you?” 

“I hardly noticed him.” 

“He did not impress you as an evil personality?” 

She shrugged her shoulders slightly. “Really, I cannot say I thought about it.” 

Poirot looked at her keenly. 

“You are, I think, a little bit contemptuous of the way I prosecute my inquiries,” he said with a twinkle. “Not so, you think, would an English inquiry be conducted. There everything would be cut and dried—it would be all kept to the facts—a wellordered business. But I, Mademoiselle, have my little originalities. I look first at my witness, I sum up his or her character, and I frame my questions accordingly. just a little minute ago I am asking questions of a gentleman who wants to tell me all his ideas on every subject. Well, him I keep strictly to the point. I want him to answer yes or no. This or that. And then you come. I see at once that you will be orderly and methodical. You will confine yourself to the matter in hand. Your answers will be brief and to the point. And because, Mademoiselle, human nature is perverse, I ask of you quite different questions. I ask what you feel, what you think. It does not please you, this method?” 

“If you will forgive my saying so, it seems somewhat of a waste of time. Whether or not I liked Mr. Ratchett’s face does not seem likely to be helpful in finding out who killed him.” 

“Do you know who the man Ratchett really was, Mademoiselle?” 

She nodded. “Mrs. Hubbard has been telling everyone.” 

“And what do you think of the Armstrong affair?” 

“It was quite abominable,” said the girl crisply. 

Poirot looked at her thoughtfully. 

“You are travelling from Baghdad, I believe, Miss Debenham?” 

“Yes.” 

“To London?” 

“Yes.” 

“What have you been doing in Baghdad?” 

“I have been acting as governess to two children.” 

“Are you returning to your post after your holiday?” 

“I am not sure.” 

“Why is that?” 

“Baghdad is rather out of things. I think I should prefer a post in London if I can hear of a suitable one.” 

“I see. I thought, perhaps, you might be going to be married.” 

Miss Debenham did not reply. She raised her eyes and looked Poirot full in the face. The glance said plainly: “You are impertinent.”  

“What is your opinion of the lady who shares your compartment—Miss Ohlsson?” 

“She seems a pleasant, simple creature.” 

“What colour is her dressing-gown?” 

Mary Debenham stared. “A kind of brownish colour—natural wool.” 

“Ah! I may mention without indiscretion, I hope, that I noticed the colour of your dressing-gown on the way from Aleppo to Stamboul. A pale mauve, I believe.” 

“Yes, that is right.” 

“Have you any other dressing-gown, Mademoiselle? A scarlet dressing-gown, for example?” 

“No, that is not mine.” 

Poirot leant forward. He was like a cat pouncing on a mouse. 

“Whose, then?’ 

The girl drew back a little, startled. “I don’t know. What do you mean?” 

“You do not say, ‘No, I have no such thing.’ You say, ‘That is not mine.’ Meaning that such a thing does belong to someone else.” 

She nodded. 

“Somebody else on this train?” 

‘Yes.” 

“Whose is it?” 

“I told you just now: I don’t know. I woke up this morning about five o’clock with the feeling that the train had been standing still for a long time. I opened the door and looked out into the corridor, thinking we might be at a station. I saw someone in a scarlet kimono some way down the corridor.” 

“And you don’t know who it was? Was she fair, or dark, or grey-haired?” 

“I can’t say. She had on a shingle cap and I only saw the back of her head.” 

“And in build?” 

“Tallish and slim, I should judge, but it’s difficult to say. The kimono was embroidered with dragons.” 

“Yes, yes, that is right—dragons.” He was silent a minute. He murmured to himself. “I cannot understand. I cannot understand. None of this makes sense.” 

Then, looking up, he said: “I need not keep you further, Mademoiselle.” 

“Oh!” She seemed rather taken aback but rose promptly. 

In the doorway, however, she hesitated a minute and then came back. 

“The Swedish lady—Miss Ohlsson, is it?—seems rather worried. She says you told her she was the last person to see this man alive. She thinks, I believe, that you suspect her on that account. Can’t I tell her that she has made a mistake? Really, you know, she is the kind of creature who wouldn’t hurt a fly.” She smiled a little as she spoke.  

“What time was it that she went to fetch the aspirin from Mrs. Hubbard?” 

“Just after half-past ten.” 

“She was away—how long?” 

“About five minutes.” 

“Did she leave the compartment again during the night?” 

“No.” 

Poirot turned to the doctor. “Could Ratchett have been killed as early as that?” 

The doctor shook his head. 

“Then I think you can reassure your friend, Mademoiselle.” 

“Thank you.” She smiled suddenly at him, a smile that invited sympathy. “She’s like a sheep, you know. She gets anxious and bleats.” 

She turned and went out.  

12 THE EVIDENCE OF THE GERMAN LADY’S-MAID 

M. Bouc was looking at his friend curiously. “I do not quite understand you, mon vieux. You were trying to do—what?” 

“I was searching for a flaw, my friend.” 

“A flaw?” 

“Yes—in the armour of a young lady’s self-possession. I wished to shake her sang-froid. Did I succeed? I do not know. But I know this: she did not expect me to tackle the matter as I did.” 

“You suspect her,” said M. Bow slowly. “But why? She seems a very charming young lady—the last person in the world to be mixed up in a crime of this kind.” 

“I agree,” said Constantine. “She is cold. She has not emotions. She would not stab a man—she would sue him in the law courts.” 

Poirot sighed. 

“You must, both of you, get rid of your obsession that this is an unpremeditated and sudden crime. As for the reasons why I suspect Miss Debenham, there are two. One is because of something that I overheard, and that you do not as yet know.” 

He retailed to them the curious interchange of phrases he had overheard on the journey from Aleppo. 

“That is curious, certainly,” said M. Bouc when he had finished. “It needs explaining. If it means what you suspect it means, then they are both of them in it together—she and the stiff Englishman.” 

Poirot nodded. 

“And that is just what is not borne out by the facts,” he said. “See you, if they were both in this together, what should we expect to find? That each of them would provide an alibi for the other. Is not that so? But no—that does not happen. Miss Debenham’s alibi is provided by a Swedish woman whom she has never seen before, and Colonel Arbuthnot’s alibi is vouched for by MacQueen, the dead mans secretary. No, that solution of the puzzle is too easy.” 

“You said there was another reason for your suspicions of her,” M. Bouc, reminded him. 

Poirot smiled. 

“Ah! but that is only psychological. I ask myself, is it possible for Miss Debenham to have planned this crime? Behind this business, I am convinced, there is a cool, intelligent, resourceful brain. Miss Debenham answers to that description.”  

M. Bouc shook his head. “I think you are wrong, my friend. I do not see that young English girl as a criminal.” “Ah! Well,” said Poirot, picking up the last passport. “To the final name on our list. Hildegarde Schmidt, lady’s-maid.” Summoned by the attendant, Hildegarde Schmidt came into the restaurant car and stood waiting respectfully. 

Poirot motioned her to sit down. 

She did so, folding her hands and waiting placidly till he questioned her. She seemed a placid creature altogether—eminently respectable, perhaps not overintelligent. Poirot’s methods with Hildegarde Schmidt were a complete contrast to his handling of Mary Debenham. 

He was at his kindest and most genial, setting the woman at her ease. Then, having got her to write down her name and address, he slid gently into his questions. 

The interview took place in German. 

“We want to know as much as possible about what happened last night,” he said. “We know that you cannot give us much information bearing on the crime itself, but you may have seen or heard something that, while conveying nothing to you, may be valuable to us. You understand?” 

She did not seem to. Her broad, kindly face remained set in its expression of placid stupidity as she answered: 

“I do not know anything, Monsieur.” 

“Well, for instance you know that your mistress sent for you last night.” 

“That, yes.” 

“Do you remember the time?” 

“I do not, Monsieur. I was asleep, you see, when the attendant came and told me.” 

“Yes, yes. Was it usual for you to be sent for in this way?” 

“It was not unusual, Monsieur. The gracious lady often required attention at night. She did not sleep well.” 

“Eh bien, then, you received the summons and you got up. Did you put on a dressing-gown?” 

“No, Monsieur, I put on a few clothes. I would not like to go in to her Excellency in my dressing-gown.” 

“And yet it is a very nice dressing-gown—scarlet, is it not?” 

She stared at him. “It is a dark blue flannel dressing-gown, Monsieur.” 

“Ah! continue. A little pleasantry on my part, that is all. So you went along to 

Madame la Princesse. And what did you do when you got there?”  

“I gave her massage, Monsieur, and then I read aloud. I do not read aloud very well, but her Excellency says that is all the better—so it sends her better to sleep. When she became sleepy, Monsieur, she told me to go, so I closed the book and I returned to my own compartment.” 

“Do you know what time that was?” 

“No, Monsieur.” 

“Well, how long had you been with Madame la Princesse?” 

“About half an hour, Monsieur.” 

“Good, continue.” 

“First, I fetched her Excellency an extra rug from my compartment. It was very cold in spite of the heating. I arranged the rug over her, and she wished me good night. I poured her out some mineral water. Then I turned out the light and left her. 

“And then?” 

“There is nothing more, Monsieur. I returned to my carriage and went to sleep.” 

“And you met no one in the corridor?” 

“No, Monsieur.” 

“You did not, for instance, see a lady in a scarlet kimono with dragons on it?” 

Her mild eyes bulged at him. “No, indeed, Monsieur. There was nobody about except the attendant. Everyone was asleep.” 

“But you did see the conductor?” 

“Yes, Monsieur.” 

“What was he doing!” 

“He came out of one of the compartments, Monsieur.” 

“What?” M. Bouc leaned forward. “Which one?” 

Hildegarde Schmidt looked frightened again, and Poirot cast a reproachful glance at his friend. 

“Naturally,” he said. “The conductor often has to answer bells at night. Do you remember which compartment it was?” 

“It was about the middle of the coach, Monsieur. Two or three doors from Madame la Princesse.” 

“Ah! tell us, if you please, exactly where this was and what happened?” 

“He nearly ran into me, Monsieur. It was when I was returning from my compartment to that of the Princess with the rug.” 

“And he came out of a compartment and almost collided with you. In which direction was he going?” 

“Towards me, Monsieur. He apologised and passed on down the corridor towards the dining-car. A bell began ringing, but I do not think he answered it.” She paused and then said: “I do not understand. How is it—” 

Poirot spoke reassuringly.  

“It is just a question of time,” he said. “All a matter of routine. This poor conductor, he seems to have had a busy night—first waking you and then answering bells.” 

“It was not the same conductor who woke me, Monsieur. It was another one.” 

“Ah! another one! Had you seen him before?” 

“No, Monsieur.” 

“Ah!—do you think you would recognise him if you saw him?” 

“I think so, Monsieur.” 

Poirot murmured something in M. Bouc’s ear. The latter got up and went to the door to give an order. 

Poirot was continuing his questions in an easy, friendly manner. 

“Have you ever been to America, Fr.ulein Schmidt?” 

“Never, Monsieur. It must be a fine country.” 

“You have heard, perhaps, who this man who was killed really was—that he was responsible for the death of a little child?” 

“Yes, I have heard, Monsieur. It was abominable—wicked. The good God should not allow such things. We are not so wicked as that in Germany.” 

Tears had come into the woman’s eyes. Her strong, motherly soul was moved. 

“It was an abominable crime,” said Poirot gravely. 

He drew a scrap of cambric from his pocket and handed it to her. 

“Is this your handkerchief, Fr.ulein Schmidt?” 

There was a moment’s silence as the woman examined it. She looked up after a minute. The colour had mounted a little in her face. 

“Ah! no, indeed. It is not mine, Monsieur.” 

“It has the initial H, you see. That is why I thought it was yours.” 

“Ah! Monsieur, it is a lady’s handkerchief, that. A very expensive handkerchief. Embroidered by hand. It comes from Paris, I should say.” 

“It is not yours and you do not know whose it is?” 

“I? Oh! no, Monsieur.” 

Of the three listening, only Poirot caught the nuance of hesitation in the reply. 

M. Bouc whispered in his ear. Poirot nodded and said to the woman: “The three sleeping-car attendants are coming in. Will you be so kind as to tell me which is the one you met last night as you were going with the rug to the Princess?” 

The three men entered. Pierre Michel, the big blond conductor of the Athens-

Paris coach, and the stout burly conductor of the Bucharest one. Hildegarde Schmidt looked at them and immediately shook her head. “No, Monsieur,” she said. “None of these is the man I saw last night.” “But these are the only conductors on the train. You must be mistaken.”  

“I am quite sure, Monsieur. These are all tall, big men. The one I saw was small and dark. He had a little moustache. His voice when he said ‘Pardon’ was weak, like a woman’s. Indeed, I remember him very well, Monsieur.”  

13 

SUMMARY OF THE PASSENGERS’ EVIDENCE 

“A small dark man with a womanish voice,” said M. Bouc. The three conductors and Hildegarde Schmidt had been dismissed. 

M. Bouc made a despairing gesture. “But I understand nothing—but nothing, of all of this! The enemy that this Ratchett spoke of, he was then on the train after all? But where is he now? How can he have vanished into thin air? My head, it whirls. Say something, then, my friend, I implore you. Show me how the impossible can be possible!” “It is a good phrase that,” said Poirot. “The impossible cannot have happened, therefore the impossible must be possible in spite of appearances.” 

“Explain to me, then, quickly, what actually happened on the train last night.” 

“I am not a magician, mon cher. I am, like you, a very puzzled man. This affair advances in a very strange manner.” 

“It does not advance at all. It stays where it was.” 

Poirot shook his head. “No, that is not true. We are more advanced. We know certain things. We have heard the evidence of the passengers.” 

“And what has that told us? Nothing at all.” 

“I would not say that, my friend.” 

“I exaggerate, perhaps. The American Hardman, and the German maid—yes, 

they have added something to our knowledge. That is to say, they have made the whole business more unintelligible than it was.” “No, no, no,” said Poirot soothingly. 

M. Bouc turned upon him. “Speak, then, let us hear the wisdom of Hercule Poirot.” “Did I not tell you that I was, like you, a very puzzled man? But at least we can face our problem. We can arrange such facts as we have with order and method.” 

“Pray continue, Monsieur,” said Dr. Constantine. 

Poirot cleared his throat and straightened a piece of blotting-paper. 

“Let us review the case as it stands at this moment. First, there are certain indisputable facts. This man, Ratchett or Cassetti, was stabbed in twelve places and 

died last night. That is fact one.” “I grant it you—I grant it, mon vieux,” said M. Bouc with a gesture of irony. Hercule Poirot was not at all put out. He continued calmly.  

“I will pass over for the moment certain rather peculiar appearances which Dr. Constantine and I have already discussed together. I will come to them presently. The next fact of importance, to my mind, is the time of the crime.” 

“That, again, is one of the few things we do know,” said M. Bouc. “The crime was committed at a quarter past one this morning. Everything goes to show that that was so.” 

“Not everything. You exaggerate. There is, certainly, a fair amount of evidence to support that view.” 

“I am glad you admit that at least.” 

Poirot went on calmly, unperturbed by the interruption. “We have before us three possibilities. 

“(1)—that the crime was committed, as you say, at a quarter past one. This is supported by the evidence of the watch, by the evidence of Mrs. Hubbard, and by the evidence of the German woman, Hildegarde Schmidt. It agrees with the evidence of Dr. Constantine. 

“(2)—that the crime was committed later, and that the evidence of the watch was deliberately faked in order to mislead. 

“(3)—that the crime was committed earlier, and the evidence faked for the same reason as above. 

“Now if we accept possibility (1) as the most likely to have occurred, and the one supported by most evidence, we must also accept certain facts arising from it. If the crime was committed at a quarter past one, the murderer cannot have left the train, and the questions arise: Where is he? And who is he? 

“To begin with, let us examine the evidence carefully. We first hear of the existence of this man—the small dark man with a womanish voice—from the man Hardman. He says that Ratchett told him of this person and employed him to watch out for the man. There is no evidence to support this; we have only Hardman’s word for it. Let us next examine the question: Is Hardman the person he pretends to be an operative of a New York detective agency? 

“What to my mind is so interesting in this case is that we have none of the facilities afforded to the police. We cannot investigate the bona fides of any of these people. We have to rely solely on deduction. That, to me, makes the matter very much more interesting. There is no routine work. It is all a matter of the intellect. I ask myself: Can we accept Hardman’s account of himself? I make my decision and I answer ‘Yes.’ I am of the opinion that we can accept Hardman’s account of himself.” 

“You rely on the intuition? What the Americans call ‘the hunch’?” asked Dr. Constantine. 

“Not at all. I regard the probabilities. Hardman is travelling with a false passport—that will at once make him an object of suspicion. The first thing that the  

police will do when they do arrive upon the scene is to detain Hardman and cable as to whether his account of himself is true. In the case of many of the passengers, to establish their bona fides will be difficult; in most cases it will probably not be attempted, especially since there seems nothing in the way of suspicion attaching to them. But in Hardman’s case it is simple. Either he is the person he represents himself to be, or he is not. Therefore I say that all will prove to be in order.” 

“You acquit him of suspicion?” 

“Not at all. You misunderstand me. For all I know, any American detective might have his own private reasons for wishing to murder Ratchett. No, what I am saying is that I think we can accept Hardman’s own account of himself. This story, then, that he tells of Ratchett’s seeking him out and employing him is not unlikely, and is most probably—though not of course certainly—true. If we are going to accept it as true, we must see if there is any confirmation of it. We find it in rather an unlikely place—in the evidence of Hildegarde Schmidt. Her description of the man she saw in Wagon Lit uniform tallies exactly. Is there any further confirmation of these two stories? There is. There is the button that Mrs. Hubbard found in her compartment. And there is also another corroborating statement which you may not have noticed.” 

“What is that?” 

“The fact that both Colonel Arbuthnot and Hector MacQueen mention that the conductor passed their carriage. They attached no importance to the fact, but, Messieurs, Pierre Michel has declared that he did not leave his seat except on certain specified occasions—none of which would take him down to the far end of the coach past the compartment in which Arbuthnot and MacQueen were sitting. 

“Therefore this story, the story of a small dark man with a womanish voice dressed in Wagon Lit uniform, rests on the testimony, direct or indirect, of four witnesses.” 

“One small point,” said Dr. Constantine. “If Hildegarde Schmidt’s story is true, how is it that the real conductor did not mention having seen her when he came to answer Mrs. Hubbard’s bell?” 

“That is explained, I think. When he arrived to answer Mrs. Hubbard, the maid was in with her mistress. When she finally returned to her own compartment, the conductor was in with Mrs. Hubbard.” 

M. Bouc had been waiting with difficulty until they had finished. “Yes, yes, my friend,” he said impatiently to Poirot. “But whilst I admire your caution, your method of advancing a step at a time, I submit that you have not yet touched the point at issue. We are all agreed that this person exists. The point is, where did he go?” 

Poirot shook his head reprovingly.  

“You are in error. You are inclined to put the cart before the horse. Before I ask myself, ‘Where did this man vanish to?’ I ask myself, ‘Did such a man really exist?’ Because, you see, if the man were an invention—a fabrication—how much easier to make him disappear! So I try to establish first that there really is such a flesh-and-blood person.” 

“And having arrived at the fact that there is—eh bien, where is he now?” 

“There are only two answers to that, mon cher. Either he is still hidden on the train in a place of such extraordinary ingenuity that we cannot even think of it; or else he is, as one might say, two persons. That is, he is both himself—the man feared by M. Ratchett—and a passenger on the train so well disguised that M. Ratchett did not recognise him.” 

“It is an idea, that,” said M. Bouc, his face lighting up. Then it clouded over again. “But there is one objection—” 

Poirot took the words out of his mouth. 

“The height of the man. It is that you would say? With the exception of Mr. Ratchett’s valet, all the passengers are big men—the Italian, Colonel Arbuthnot, Hector MacQueen, Count Andrenyi. Well, that leaves us the valet—not a very likely supposition. But there is another possibility. Remember the ‘womanish’ voice. That gives us a choice of alternatives. The man may be disguised as a woman, or, alternatively, he may actually be a woman. A tall woman dressed in men’s clothes would look small.” 

“But surely Ratchett would have known—” 

“Perhaps he did know. Perhaps, already, this woman had attempted his life, wearing a mares clothes the better to accomplish her purpose. Ratchett may have guessed that she would use the same trick again, so he tells Hardman to look for a man. But he mentions, however, a womanish voice.” 

“It is a possibility,” said M. Bouc. “But—” 

“Listen, my friend, I think that I should now tell you of certain inconsistencies noticed by Dr. Constantine.” 

He retailed at length the conclusions that he and the doctor had arrived at together from the nature of the dead man’s wounds. M. Bouc groaned and held his head again. “I know,” said Poirot sympathetically. “I know exactly how you feel. The head spins, does it not?” 

“The whole thing is a fantasy!” cried M. Bouc. 

“Exactly. It is absurd—improbable—it cannot be. So I myself have said. And yet, my friend, there it is! One cannot escape from the facts.” 

“It is madness!” 

“Is it not? It is so mad, my friend, that sometimes I am haunted by the sensation that really it must be very simple. ... But that is only one of my ‘little ideas’!” 

“Two murderers,” groaned M. Bouc. “And on the Orient Express—”  

The thought almost made him weep. 

“And now let us make the fantasy more fantastic,” said Poirot cheerfully. “Last night on the train, there are two mysterious strangers. There is the Wagon Lit attendant answering to the description given us by M. Hardman, and seen by Hildegarde Schmidt, Colonel Arbuthnot and M. MacQueen. There is also a woman in a red kimono—a tall slim woman, seen by Pierre Michel, Miss Debenham, M. MacQueen and myself (and smelt, I may say, by Colonel Arbuthnot!). Who was she? No one on the train admits to having a scarlet kimono. She, too, has vanished. Was she one and the same with the spurious Wagon Lit attendant? Or was she some quite distinct personality? Where are they, these two? And incidentally, where are the Wagon Lit uniform and the scarlet kimono?” 

“Ah! that is something definite.” M. Bouc sprang up eagerly. “We must search all the passengers’ luggage. Yes, that will be something.” 

Poirot rose also. “I will make a prophecy,” he said. 

“You know where they are?” 

“I have a little idea.” 

“Where, then?” 

“You will find the scarlet kimono in the baggage of one of the men, and you will find the uniform of the Wagon Lit conductor in the baggage of Hildegarde Schmidt.” 

“Hildegarde Schmidt? You think—” 

“Not what you are thinking. I will put it like this. If Hildegarde Schmidt is guilty, the uniform may be found in her baggage. But if she is innocent, it certainly will be.” 

“But how—” began M. Bouc and stopped. “What is this noise that approaches?” he cried. “It resembles a locomotive in motion.” 

The noise drew nearer. It consisted of shrill cries and protests in a woman’s voice. The door at the end of the dining-car burst open. Mrs. Hubbard burst in. 

“It’s too horrible!” she cried. It’s just too horrible. In my sponge-bag. My sponge-bag! A great knife—all over blood?” 

And suddenly toppling forward, she fainted heavily on M. Bouc’s shoulder.  

14 

THE EVIDENCE OF THE WEAPON 

With more vigour than chivalry, A Bouc deposited the fainting lady with her head on the table. Dr. Constantine yelled for one of the restaurant attendants, who came at a run. 

“Keep her head so,” said the doctor. “If she revives give her a little cognac. You understand?” 

Then he hurried off after the other two. His interest lay wholly in the crime— swooning middle-aged ladies did not interest him at all. 

It is possible that Mrs. Hubbard revived rather more quickly by these methods than she might otherwise have done. A few minutes later she was sitting up, sipping cognac from a glass proffered by the attendant, and talking once more. 

“I just can’t tell you how terrible it was! I don’t suppose anybody on this train can understand my feelings. I’ve always been very, very sensitive ever since I was a child. The mere sight of blood—ugh! Why, even now I get faint when I think about it!” 

The attendant proffered the glass again. “Encore un peu, Madame?” 

“D’you think I’d better? I’m a lifelong teetotaller. I never touch spirits or wine at any time. All my family are abstainers. Still, perhaps as this is only medicinal— ” 

She sipped once more. 

In the meantime Poirot and M. Bouc, closely followed by Dr. Constantine, had hurried out of the restaurant car and along the corridor of the Stamboul coach towards Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment. 

Every traveller on the train seemed to be congregated outside the door. The conductor, a harassed look on his face, was keeping them back. 

“Mais il n’y a rien à voir,” he said, and repeated the sentiment in several other languages. 

“Let me pass if you please,” said M. Bouc. 

Squeezing his rotundity past the obstructing passengers he entered the compartment, Poirot close behind him. 

“I am glad you have come, Monsieur,” said the conductor with a sigh of relief. “Everyone has been trying to enter. The American lady—such screams as she gave—ma foi, I thought she too had been murdered! I came at a run, and there she was screaming like a mad woman; and she cried out that she must fetch you, and  

she departed screeching at the top of her voice and telling everybody whose carriage she passed what had occurred.” 

He added, with a gesture of the hand: “It is in there, Monsieur. I have not touched it.” 

Hanging on the handle of the door that gave access to the next compartment was a large-checked rubber sponge-bag. Below it on the floor, just where it had fallen from Mrs. Hubbard’s hand, was a straight-bladed dagger—a cheap affair, sham Oriental with an embossed hilt and a tapering blade. The blade was stained with patches of what looked like rust. 

Poirot picked it up delicately. 

“Yes,” he murmured. “There is no mistake. Here is our missing weapon all right—eh, doctor?” 

The doctor examined it. 

“You need not be so careful,” said Poirot. “There will be no fingerprints on it save those of Mrs. Hubbard.” Constantine’s examination did not take long. 

“It is the weapon all right,” he said. “It would account for any of the wounds.” 

“I implore you, my friend, do not say that!” The doctor looked astonished. 

“Already we are heavily overburdened by coincidence. Two people decided to stab M. Ratchett last night. It is too much of a good thing that both of them should select the same weapon.” 

“As, to that, the coincidence is not perhaps so great as it seems,” said the doctor. “Thousands of these sham Eastern daggers are made and shipped to the bazaars of Constantinople.” 

“You console me a little, but only a little,” said Poirot. 

He looked thoughtfully at the door in front of him, then, lifting off the spongebag, he tried the handle. The door did not budge. About a foot above the handle was the door bolt. Poirot drew it back and tried again, but still the door remained fast. 

“We locked it from the other side, you remember,” said the doctor. 

“That is true,” said Poirot absently. He seemed to be thinking about something else. His brow was furrowed as though in perplexity. 

“It agrees, does it not?” said M. Bouc. “The man passes through this carriage. As he shuts the communicating door behind him he feels the sponge-bag. A thought comes to him and he quickly slips the blood-stained knife inside. Then, all unwitting that he has awakened Mrs. Hubbard, he slips out through the other door into the corridor.” 

“As you say,” murmured Poirot. “That is how it must have happened.” But the puzzled look did not leave his face. 

“But what is it?” demanded M. Bouc. “There is something, is there not, that does not satisfy you?”  

Poirot darted a quick took at him. 

“The same point does not strike you? No, evidently not. Well, it is a small matter.” 

The conductor looked into the carriage. “The American lady is coming back.” 

Dr. Constantine looked rather guilty. He had, he felt, treated Mrs. Hubbard rather cavalierly. But she had no reproaches for him. Her energies were concentrated on another matter. 

“I’m going to say one thing right out,” she said breathlessly as she arrived in the doorway. “I’m not going on any longer in this compartment! Why, I wouldn’t sleep in it to-night if you paid me a million dollars.” 

“But, Madame—” 

“I know what you are going to say, and I’m telling you right now that I won’t do any such thing! Why, I’d rather sit up all night in the corridor.” She began to cry. “Oh, if my daughter could only know—if she could see me now, why—” 

Poirot interrupted firmly. 

“You misunderstand, Madame. Your demand is most reasonable. Your baggage shall be changed at once to another compartment.” 

Mrs. Hubbard lowered her handkerchief. “is that so? Oh! I feel better right away. But surely it’s all full, unless one of the gentlemen—” 

M. Bouc spoke. “Your baggage, Madame, shall be moved out of this coach altogether. You shall have a compartment in the next coach, which was put on at Belgrade.” “Why, that’s splendid. I’m not an extra nervous woman, but to sleep in that compartment next door to a dead man!” She shivered. “It would drive me plumb crazy.” 

“Michel,” called M. Bouc. “Move this baggage into a vacant compartment in the Athens-Paris coach.” 

“Yes, Monsieur. The same one as this—the No. 3?” 

“No,” said Poirot before his friend could reply. “I think it would be better for Madame to have a different number altogether. The No. 12, for instance.” 

“Bien, Monsieur.” 

The conductor seized the luggage. Mrs. Hubbard turned gratefully to Poirot. 

“That’s very kind and delicate of you. I appreciate it, I assure you.” 

“Do not mention it, Madame. We will come with you and see you comfortably 

installed.” Mrs. Hubbard was escorted by the three men to her new home. She looked round her happily. “This is fine.” “It suits you, Madame? It is, you see, exactly like the compartment you have left.”  

“That’s so—only it faces the other way. But that doesn’t matter, for these trains go first one way and then the other. I said to my daughter, ‘I want a carriage facing the engine.’ and she said, ‘Why, Mamma, that’ll be no good to you, for if you go to sleep one way, when you wake up, the train’s going the other!’ And it was quite true what she said. Why, last evening we went into Belgrade one way and out the other.” 

“At any rate, Madame, you are quite happy and contented now?” 

“Well, no, I wouldn’t say that. Here we are stuck in a snowdrift and nobody doing anything about it, and my boat sailing the day after to-morrow.” 

“Madame,” said M. Bouc, “we are all in the same case—every one of us.” 

“Well, that’s true,” admitted Mrs. Hubbard. “But nobody else has had a murderer walking right through her compartment in the middle of the night. 

“What still puzzles me, Madame,” said Poirot, “is how the man got into your compartment if the communicating door was bolted as you say. You are sure that it was bolted?” 

“Why, the Swedish lady tried it before my eyes.” 

“Let us just reconstruct that little scene. You were lying in your bunk—so—and you could not see for yourself, you say?” 

“No, because of the sponge-bag. Oh! my, I shall have to get a new sponge-bag. It makes me feel sick at my stomach to look at this one.” 

Poirot picked up the sponge-bag and hung it on the handle of the communicating door into the next carriage. 

“Précisément. I see,” he said. “The bolt is just underneath the handle—the sponge-bag masks it. You could not see from where you were lying whether the bolt was turned or not.” 

“Why, that’s just what I’ve been telling you!” 

“And the Swedish lady, Miss Ohlsson, stood so, between you and the door. She tried it and told you it was bolted.” 

“That’s so.” 

“All the same, Madame, she may have made an error. You see what I mean.” Poirot seemed anxious to explain. “The bolt is just a projection of metal—so. When it is turned to the right, the door is locked. When it is left straight, the door is unlocked. Possibly she merely tried the door, and as it was locked on the other side she may have assumed that it was locked on your side.” 

“Well, I guess that would be rather stupid of her.” 

“Madame, the most kind, the most amiable, are not always the cleverest.” 

“That’s so, of course.” 

“By the way, Madame, did you travel out to Smyrna this way?” 

“No. I sailed right to Stamboul, and a friend of my daughter’s, Mr. Johnson (a perfectly lovely man, I’d like to have you know him), met me and showed me all  

round Stamboul. But it was a very disappointing city—all tumbling down; and as for those mosques, and putting on those great shuffling things over your shoes— where was I?” 

“You were saying that Mr. Johnson met you.” 

“That’s so, and he saw me on board a French Messageries boat for Smyrna, and my daughter’s husband was waiting right on the quay. What he’ll say when he hears about all this! My daughter said this would be just the safest, easiest way imaginable. ‘You just sit in your carriage,’ she said, ‘and you land right in Parrus, and there the American Express will meet you.’ And, oh, dear, what am I to do about cancelling my steamship passage? I ought to let them know. I can’t possibly make it now. This is just too terrible—” 

Mrs. Hubbard showed signs of tears once more. 

Poirot, who had been fidgeting slightly, seized his opportunity. 

“You have had a shock, Madame. The restaurant attendant shall be instructed to bring you along some tea and some biscuits.” 

“I don’t know that I’m so set on tea,” said Mrs. Hubbard tearfully. “That’s more an English habit.” 

“Coffee, then, Madame. You need some stimulant—” 

“That cognac’s made my head feel mighty funny. I think I would like some coffee.” 

“Excellent. You must revive your forces.” 

“My, what a funny expression!” 

“But first, Madame, a little matter of routine. You permit that I make a search of your baggage!” 

“What for?” 

“We are about to commence a search of all the passengers’ luggage. I do not want to remind you of an unpleasant experience, but your sponge-bag— remember.” 

“Mercy! Perhaps you’d better! I just couldn’t bear to get any more surprises of that kind.” 

The examination was quickly over. Mrs. Hubbard was travelling with the minimum of luggage—a hat-box, a cheap suitcase, and a well-burdened travelling bag. The contents of all three were simple and straightforward, and the examination would not have taken more than a couple of minutes had not Mrs. Hubbard delayed matters by insisting on due attention being paid to photographs of “my daughter” and of two rather ugly children—“my daughter’s children. Aren’t they cunning?”  

15 

THE EVIDENCE OF THE PASSENGERS’ LUGGAGE 

Having delivered himself of various polite insincerities, and having told Mrs. Hubbard that he would order coffee to be brought to her, Poirot was able to take his leave accompanied by his two friends. 

“Well, we have made a start and drawn, a blank,” observed M. Bouc. “Whom shall we attack next?” 

“It would be simplest, I think, just to proceed along the train, carriage by carriage. That means that we start with No. 16—the amiable Mr. Hardman.” 

Mr. Hardman, who was smoking a cigar, welcomed them affably. 

“Come right in, gentlemen. That is, if it’s humanly possible. It’s just a mite cramped in here for a party.” 

M. Bouc explained the object of their visit, and the big detective nodded comprehendingly. “That’s O.K. To tell the truth I’ve been wondering you didn’t get down to it sooner. Here are my keys, gentlemen, and if you like to search my pockets too, why, you’re welcome. Shall I reach the grips down for you?” 

“The conductor will do that. Michel!” 

The contents of Mr. Hardman’s two “grips” were soon examined and passed. They contained, perhaps, an undue proportion of spirituous liquor. Mr. Hardman winked. 

“It’s not often they search your grips at the frontiers—not if you fix the conductor. I handed out a wad of Turkish notes right away, and there’s been no trouble so far.” 

“And at Paris?” 

Mr. Hardman winked again. “By the time I get to Paris,” he said, “what’s left over of this little lot will go into a bottle labelled hairwash.” 

“You are not a believer in Prohibition, Monsieur Hardman,” said M. Bouc with a smile. 

“Well,” said Hardman, “I can’t say Prohibition has ever worried me any.” 

“Ah!” said M. Bouc. “The speakeasy.” He pronounced the word with care, savouring it. “Your American terms are so quaint, so expressive,” he said. 

“Me, I would much like to go to America,” said Poirot. 

“You’d learn a few go-ahead methods over there,” said Hardman. “Europe 

needs waking up. She’s half asleep.”  

“It is true that America is the country of progress,” agreed Poirot. “There is much that I admire about Americans. Only—I am perhaps old-fashioned—but me, I find the American women less charming than my own countrywomen. The French or the Belgian girl, coquettish, charming—I think there is no one to touch her.” 

Hardman turned away to peer out at the snow for a minute. 

“Perhaps you’re right, M. Poirot,” he said. “But I guess every nation likes its own girls best.” He blinked as though the snow hurt his eyes. 

“Kind of dazzling, isn’t it?” he remarked. “Say, gentlemen, this business is getting on my nerves. Murder and the snow and all. And nothing doing. Just hanging about and killing time. I’d like to get busy after someone or something.” 

“The true Western spirit of hustle,” said Poirot with a smile. 

The conductor replaced the bags and they moved on to the next compartment. Colonel Arbuthnot was sitting in a corner smoking a pipe and reading a magazine. 

Poirot explained their errand. The Colonel made no demur. He had two heavy leather suitcases. 

“The rest of my kit has gone by long sea,” he explained. 

Like most Army men the Colonel was a neat packer. The examination of his baggage took only a few minutes. Poirot noted a packet of pipe-cleaners. 

“You always use the same kind?” he asked. “Usually. If I can get ’em.” 

“Ah!” Poirot nodded. These pipe-cleaners corresponded exactly with the one he had found on the floor of the dead man’s compartment. 

Dr. Constantine remarked as much when they were out in the corridor again. 

“Tout de même,” murmured Poirot, “I can hardly believe it. It is not dans son caractère, and when you have said that, you have said everything.” 

The door of the next compartment was closed. It was that occupied by Princess Dragomiroff. They knocked on the door and the Princess’s deep voice called “Entrez!” 

M. Bouc was spokesman. He was very deferential and polite as he explained their errand. 

The Princess listened to him in silence, her small toad-like face quite impassive. 

“If it is necessary, Messieurs,” she said quietly when he had finished, “that is all there is to it. My maid has the keys. She will attend to it with you.” 

“Does your maid always carry your keys, Madame?” asked Poirot. 

“Certainly, Monsieur.” 

“And if, during the night at one of the frontiers, the customs officials should 

require a piece of luggage to be opened?” The old lady shrugged her shoulders. “It is very unlikely. But in such a case, the conductor would fetch her.” “You trust her, then, implicitly, Madame?”  

“I have told you so already,” said the Princess quietly. “I do not employ people whom I do not trust.” 

“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “Trust is indeed something in these days. It is perhaps better to have a homely woman whom one can trust than a more chic maid—for example, some smart Parisienne.” 

He saw the dark intelligent eyes come slowly round and fasten themselves upon his face. “What exactly are you implying, M. Poirot?” 

“Nothing, Madame. I? Nothing.” 

“But yes. You think, do you not, that I should have a smart Frenchwoman to attend to my toilet?” 

“It would be perhaps more usual, Madame.” She shook her head. “Schmidt is devoted to me.” Her voice dwelt lingeringly on the words. “Devotion—c’est impayable.” 

The German woman had arrived with the keys. The Princess spoke to her in her own language, telling her to open the valises and help the gentlemen in their search. She herself remained in the corridor looking out at the snow, and Poirot remained with her, leaving M. Bouc to the task of searching the luggage. 

She regarded him with a grim smile. 

“Well, Monsieur, do you not wish to see what my valises contain?” 

He shook his head. “Madame, it is a formality, that is all.” 

“Are you so sure?” 

“In your case, yes.” 

“And yet I knew and loved Sonia Armstrong. What do you think, then? That I would not soil my hands with killing such canaille as that man Cassetti? Well, perhaps you are right.” 

She was silent a minute or two. Then she said: 

“With such a man as that, do you know what I should have liked to do? I should have liked to call to my servants: ‘Flog this man to death and fling him out on the rubbish heap!’ That is the way things were done when I was young, Monsieur.” 

Still he did not speak, just listened attentively. 

She looked at him with a sudden impetuosity. “You do not say anything, M. Poirot. What is it that you are thinking, I wonder?” 

He looked at her with a very direct glance. “I think, Madame, that your strength is in your will—not in your arm.” 

She glanced down at her thin, black-clad arms ending in those claw-like yellow hands with the rings on the fingers. 

“It is true,” she said. “I have no strength in these—none. I do not know whether I am sorry or glad.” 

Then she turned abruptly back towards her carriage where the maid was busily packing up the cases.  

The Princess cut short M. Bouc’s apologies. 

“There is no need for you to apologise, Monsieur,” she said. “A murder has been committed. Certain actions have to be performed. That is all there is to it.” 

“Vous êtes bien aimable, Madame.” 

She inclined her head slightly as they departed. 

The doors of the next two carriages were shut. M. Bouc paused and scratched his head. 

“Diable!” he said. “This may be awkward. These are diplomatic passports. Their luggage is exempt.” 

“From customs examination, yes. But a murder is different.” 

“I know. All the same—we do not want to have complications.” 

“Do not distress yourself, my friend. The Count and Countess will be reasonable. See how amiable Princess Dragomiroff was about it.” 

“She is truly grande dame. These two are also of the same position, but the Count impressed me as a man of somewhat truculent disposition. He was not pleased when you insisted on questioning his wife. And this will annoy him still further. Suppose—eh?—we omit them. After all, they can have nothing to do with the matter. Why should I stir up needless trouble for myself?” 

“I do not agree with you,” said Poirot. “I feel sure that Count Andrenyi will be reasonable. At any rate let us make the attempt.” 

And before M. Bouc could reply, he rapped sharply on the door of No. 13. 

A voice from within cried “Entrez!” 

The Count was sitting in the corner near the door reading a newspaper. The Countess was curled up in the opposite corner near the window. There was a pillow behind her head and she seemed to have been asleep. 

“Pardon, Monsieur le Comte,” began Poirot. “pray forgive this intrusion. It is that we are making a search of all the baggage on the train. In most cases a mere formality. But it has to be done. M. Bouc suggests that, as you have a diplomatic passport, you might reasonably claim to be exempt from such a search.” 

The Count considered for a moment. 

“Thank you,” he said. “But I do not think that I care to have an exception made in my case. I should prefer that our baggage should be examined like that of the other passengers.” 

He turned to his wife. “You do not object, I hope, Elena?” 

“Not at all,” said the Countess without hesitation. 

A rapid and somewhat perfunctory search followed. Poirot seemed to be trying to mask an embarrassment by making various small pointless remarks, such as: 

“Here is a label all wet on your suitcase, Madame,” as he lifted down a blue morocco case with initials on it and a coronet.  

The Countess did not reply to this observation. She seemed, indeed, rather bored by the whole proceeding, remaining curled up in her corner and staring dreamily out through the window whilst the men searched her luggage in the compartment next door. 

Poirot finished his search by opening the little cupboard above the washbasin and taking a rapid glance at its contents—a sponge, face cream, powder and a small bottle labelled trional. 

Then with polite remarks on either side, the search party withdrew. 

Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment, that of the dead man, and Poirot’s own came next. 

They now came to the second-class carriages. The first one, Nos. 10 and 11, was occupied by Mary Debenham, who was reading a book, and Greta Ohlsson, who was fast asleep but woke with a start at their entrance. 

Poirot repeated his formula. The Swedish lady seemed agitated, Mary Debenham calmly indifferent. He addressed himself to the Swedish lady. 

“If you permit, Mademoiselle, we will examine your baggage first, and then perhaps you would be so good as to see how the American lady is getting on. We have moved her into one of the carriages in the next coach, but she is still very much upset as the result of her discovery. I have ordered coffee to be sent to her, but I think she is of those to whom someone to talk to is a necessity of the first order.” 

The good lady was instantly sympathetic. She would go immediately. It must have been indeed a terrible shock to the nerves, and already the poor lady was upset by the journey and leaving her daughter. Ah, yes, certainly she would go at once—her case was not locked—and she would take with her some sal ammoniac. 

She bustled off. Her possessions were soon examined. They were meagre in the extreme. She had evidently not yet noticed the missing wires from the hat-box. 

Miss Debenham had put her book down. She was watching Poirot. When he asked her, she handed over her keys. Then, as he lifted down a case and opened it, she said: 

“Why did you send her away, M. Poirot?” 

“I, Mademoiselle! Why, to minister to the American lady.” 

“An excellent pretext—but a pretext all the same.” 

“I don’t understand you, Mademoiselle.” 

“I think you understand me very well.” She smiled. “You wanted to get me alone. Wasn’t that it?” 

“You are putting words into my mouth, Mademoiselle.” 

“And ideas into your head? No, I don’t think so. The ideas are already there. That is right, isn’t it?” 

“Mademoiselle, we have a proverb—”  

“Qui s’excuse s’accuse—is that what you were going to say? You must give me the credit for a certain amount of observation and common sense. For some reason or other you have got it into your head that I know something about this sordid business—this murder of a man I never saw before.” 

“You are imagining things, Mademoiselle.” 

“No, I am not imagining things at all. But it seems to me that a lot of time is wasted by not speaking the truth—by beating about the bush instead of coming straight out with things.” 

“And you do not like the waste of time. No, you like to come straight to the point. You like the direct method. Eh bien, I will give it to you, the direct method. I will ask you the meaning of certain words that I overheard on the journey from Syria. I had got out of the train to do what the English call ‘stretch the legs’ at the station of Konya. Your voice and the Colonel’s, Mademoiselle, they came to me out of the night. You said to him, ‘Not now. Not now. When it’s all over. When it’s behind us.’ What did you mean by those words, Mademoiselle?” 

She asked very quietly, “Do you think I meant—murder?” 

“It is I who am asking you, Mademoiselle.” 

She sighed—was lost a minute in thought. Then, as though rousing herself, she said: 

“Those words had a meaning, Monsieur, but not one that I can tell you. I can only give you my solemn word of honour that I had never set eyes on this man Ratchett in my life until I saw him on this train.” 

“And—you refuse to explain those words?” 

“Yes, if you like to put it that way—I refuse. They had to do with—with a task I had undertaken.” 

“A task that is now ended?” 

“What do you mean?” 

“It is ended, is it not?” 

“Why should you think so?” 

“Listen, Mademoiselle, I will recall to you another incident. There was a delay to the train on the day we were to reach Stamboul. You were very agitated, Mademoiselle. You, so calm, so self-controlled. You lost that calm.” 

“I did not want to miss my connection.” 

“So you said. But, Mademoiselle, the Orient Express leaves Stamboul every day of the week. Even if you had missed the connection it would only have been a matter of twenty-four hours’ delay.” 

Miss Debenham for the first time showed signs of losing her temper. 

“You do not seem to realise that one may have friends awaiting one’s arrival in London, and that a day’s delay upsets arrangements and causes a lot of annoyance.”  

“Ah, it is like that? There are friends awaiting your arrival? You do not want to cause them inconvenience?” 

“Naturally.” 

“And yet—it is curious—” 

“What is curious?” 

“On this train—again we have a delay. And this time a more serious delay, since there is no possibility of sending a telegram to your friends or of getting them on the long—the long—” 

“Long distance? The telephone, you mean.” 

“Ah, yes, the portmanteau call, as you say in England.” 

Mary Debenham smiled a little in spite of herself. “Trunk call,” she corrected. “Yes, as you say, it is extremely annoying not to be able to get any word through, either by telephone or by telegraph.” 

“And yet, Mademoiselle, this time your manner is quite different. You no longer betray the impatience. You are calm and philosophical.” 

Mary Debenham flushed and bit her lip. She no longer felt inclined to smile. 

“You do not answer, Mademoiselle?” 

“I am sorry. I did not know that there was anything to answer.” 

“Your change of attitude, Mademoiselle.” 

“Don’t you think that you are making rather a fuss about nothing, M. Poirot?” 

Poirot spread out his hands in an apologetic gesture. 

“It is perhaps a fault with us detectives. We expect the behaviour to be always consistent. We do not allow for changes of mood.” 

Mary Debenham made no reply. 

“You know Colonel Arbuthnot well, Mademoiselle?” 

He fancied that she was relieved by the change of subject. 

“I met him for the first time on this journey.” 

“Have you any reason to suspect that he may have known this man Ratchett?” 

She shook her head decisively. “I am quite sure he didn’t.” 

“Why are you sure?” 

“By the way he spoke.” 

“And yet, Mademoiselle, we found a pipe-cleaner on the floor of the dead man’s compartment. And Colonel Arbuthnot is the only man on the train who smokes a pipe.” 

He watched her narrowly, but she displayed neither surprise nor emotion, merely said: 

“Nonsense. It’s absurd. Colonel Arbuthnot is the last man in the world to be mixed up in a crime—especially a theatrical kind of crime like this.” 

It was so much what Poirot himself thought that he found himself on the point of agreeing with her. He said instead:  

“I must remind you that you do not know him very well, Mademoiselle.” 

She shrugged her shoulders. “I know the type well enough.” 

He said very gently: 

“You still refuse to tell me the meaning of those words: ‘When it’s behind us’?” 

She replied coldly, “I have nothing more to say.” 

“It does not matter,” said Hercule Poirot. “I shall find out.” 

He bowed and left the compartment, closing the door after him. 

“Was that wise, my friend?” asked M. Bouc. “You have put her on her guard— and through her, you have put the Colonel on his guard also.” 

“Mon ami, if you wish to catch a rabbit you put a ferret into the hole, and if the rabbit is there—he runs. That is all I have done.” 

They entered the compartment of Hildegarde Schmidt. 

The woman was standing in readiness, her face respectful but unemotional. 

Poirot took a quick glance through the contents of the small case on the seat. Then he motioned to the attendant to get down the bigger suitcase from the rack. 

“The keys?” he said. 

“It is not locked, Monsieur.” 

Poirot undid the hasps and lifted the lid. 

“Aha!” he said, and turning to M. Bouc, “You remember what I said? Look here a little moment!” 

On the top of the suitcase was a hastily rolled-up brown Wagon Lit uniform. 

The stolidity of the German woman underwent a sudden change. 

“Ach!” she cried. “That is not mine. I did not put it there. I have never looked in that case since we left Stamboul. Indeed, indeed, it is true!” She looked from one to another of the men pleadingly. 

Poirot took her gently by the arm and soothed her. 

“No, no, all is well. We believe you. Do not be agitated. I am sure you did not hide the uniform there as I am sure that you are a good cook. See. You are a good cook, are you not?” 

Bewildered, the woman smiled in spite of herself, “Yes, indeed, all my ladies have said so. I—” 

She stopped, her mouth open, looking frightened again. 

“No, no,” said Poirot. “I assure you all is well. See, I will tell you how this happened. This man, the man you saw in Wagon Lit uniform, comes out of the dead man’s compartment. He collides with you. That is bad luck for him. He has hoped that no one will see him. What to do next? He must get rid of his uniform. It is now not a safeguard, but a danger.” 

His glance went to M. Bow and Dr. Constantine, who were listening attentively. “There is the snow, you see. The snow which confuses all his plans. Where can he hide these clothes? All the compartments are full. No, he passes one whose door  

is open, showing it to be unoccupied. It must be the one belonging to the woman with whom he has just collided. He slips in, removes the uniform and jams it hurriedly into a suitcase on the rack. It may be some time before it is discovered.” 

“And then?” said M. Bouc. 

“That we must discuss,” Poirot said with a warning glance. 

He held up the tunic. A button, the third down, was missing. Poirot slipped his hand into the pocket and took out a conductor’s pass-key, used to unlock the doors of the compartments. 

“Here is the explanation of how one man was able to pass through locked doors,” said M. Bouc. “Your questions to Mrs. Hubbard were unnecessary. Locked or not locked, the man could easily get through the communicating door. After all, if a Wagon Lit uniform, why not a Wagon Lit key?” 

“Why not indeed?” returned Poirot. 

“We might have known it, really. You remember that Michel said that the door into the corridor of Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment was locked when he came in answer to her bell.” 

“That is so, Monsieur,” said the conductor. “That is why I thought the lady must have been dreaming.” 

“But now it is easy,” continued M. Bouc. “Doubtless he meant to relock the communicating door, also, but perhaps he heard some movement from the bed and it startled him.” 

“We have now,” said Poirot, “only to find the scarlet kimono.” 

“True. And these last two compartments are occupied by men.” 

“We will search all the same.” 

“Oh! assuredly. Besides, I remember what you said.” 

Hector MacQueen acquiesced willingly in the search. “I’d just as soon you did,” he said with a rueful smile. “I feel I’m definitely the most suspicious character on the train. You’ve only got to find a will in which the old man left me all his money, and that’ll just about fix things.” 

M. Bouc bent a suspicious glance upon him. “That’s only my fun,” added MacQueen hastily. “He’d never have left me a cent, really. I was just useful to him—languages and so on. You’re likely to be out of luck, you know, if you don’t speak anything but good American. I’m no linguist myself, but I know what I call Shopping and Hotel—snappy bits in French and German and Italian.” 

His voice was a little louder than usual. It was as though he were slightly uneasy 

over the search in spite of his expressed willingness. Poirot emerged. “Nothing,” he said. “Not even a compromising bequest!” MacQueen sighed. “Well, that’s a load off my mind,” he said humorously.  

They moved on to the last compartment. The examination of the luggage of the big Italian and of the valet yielded no result. 

The three men stood at the end of the coach looking at each other. 

“What next?” said M. Bouc. 

“We will go back to the dining-car,” said Poirot. “We know now all that we can know. We have the evidence of the passengers, the evidence of their baggage, the evidence of our eyes. ... We can expect no further help. It must be our part now to use our brains.” 

He felt in his pocket for his cigarette case. It was empty. 

“I will join you in a moment,” he said. “I shall need the cigarettes. This is a very difficult, a very curious, affair. Who wore that scarlet kimono? Where is it now? I wish I knew. There is something in this case—some factor—that escapes me! It is difficult because it has been made difficult. But we will discuss it. Pardon me a moment.” 

He went hurriedly along the corridor to his own compartment. He had, he knew, a further supply of cigarettes in one of his valises. 

He got it down and snapped back the lock. 

Then he sat back on his heels and stared. 

Neatly folded on the top of the case was a thin scarlet silk kimono embroidered with dragons. 

“So,” he murmured. “It is like that. A defiance. Very well, I take it up.”  

PART III 

HERCULE POIROT SITS BACK AND THINKS 

1 

WHICH OF THEM? 

M. Bouc. and Dr. Constantine were talking together when Poirot entered the dining-car. M. Bouc was looking depressed. “Le voilà,” said the latter when he saw Poirot. Then he added, as his friend sat down, “If you solve this case, mon cher, I shall indeed believe in miracles!” 

“It worries you, this case?” 

“Naturally it worries me. I cannot make head or tail of it.” 

“I agree,” said the doctor. He looked at Poirot with interest. “To be frank,” he said, “I cannot see what you are going to do next.” 

“No!” said Poirot thoughtfully. 

He took out his cigarette case and lit one of his tiny cigarettes. His eyes were dreamy. 

“That, to me, is the interest of this case,” he said. “We are cut off from all the normal routes of procedure. Are these people whose evidence we have taken speaking the truth, or lying? We have no means of finding out—except such means as we can devise ourselves. It is an exercise, this, of the brain.” 

“That is all very fine,” said M. Bouc. “But what have you to go upon?” 

“I told you just now. We have the evidence of the passengers and the evidence of our own eyes.” 

“Pretty evidence—that of the passengers! It told us just nothing at all.” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“I do not agree, my friend. The evidence of the passengers gave us several points of interest.” 

“Indeed,” said M. Bouc sceptically. “I did not observe it.” 

“That is because you did not listen.” 

“Well, tell me, what did I miss?” 

“I will just take one instance—the first evidence we heard, that of the young 

MacQueen. He uttered, to my mind, one very significant phrase.” “About the letters?”  

“No, not about the letters. As far as I can remember, his words were: ‘We travelled about. Mr. Ratchett wanted to see the world. He was hampered by knowing no languages. I acted more as a courier than a secretary.’ ” 

He looked from the doctor’s face to that of M. Bouc. 

“What? You still do not see? That is inexcusable—for you had a second chance again just now when he said, ‘You’re likely to be out of luck if you don’t speak anything but good American.’ ” 

“You mean—?” M. Bouc still looked puzzled. 

“Ah, it is that you want it given to you in words of one syllable. Well, here it is! 

M. Ratchett spoke no French. Yet, when the conductor came in answer to his bell last night, it was a voice speaking in French that told him that it was a mistake and that he was not wanted. It was, moreover, a perfectly idiomatic phrase that was used, not one that a man knowing only a few words of French would have selected. ‘Ce n’est rien Je me suis trompé.’ ” “It is true,” cried Constantine excitedly. “We should have seen that! I remember your laying stress on the words when you repeated them to us. Now I understand your reluctance to rely upon the evidence of the dented watch. Already, at twentythree minutes to one, Ratchett was dead—” 

“And it was his murderer speaking!” finished M. Bouc impressively. 

Poirot raised a deprecating hand. 

“Let us not go too fast. And do not let us assume more than we actually know. It is safe, I think, to say that at that time—twenty-three minutes to one—some other person was in Ratchett’s compartment, and that that person either was French or could speak the French language fluently.” 

“You are very cautious, mon vieux—” 

“One should advance only a step at a time. We have no actual evidence that Ratchett was dead at that time.” 

“There is the cry that awakened you.” 

“Yes, that is true.” 

“In one way,” said M. Bouc thoughtfully, “this discovery does not affect things very much. You heard someone moving about next door. That someone was not Ratchett, but the other man. Doubtless he is washing blood from his hands, clearing up after the crime, burning the incriminating letter. Then he waits till all is still, and, when he thinks it is safe and the coast is clear, he locks and chains Ratchett’s door on the inside, unlocks the communicating door through into Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment and slips out that way. In fact, it is exactly as we thought, with the difference that Ratchett was killed about half an hour earlier and the watch put on to a quarter past one to create an alibi.” 

“Not such a famous alibi,” said Poirot. “The hands of the watch pointed to 1.15—the exact time when the intruder actually left the scene of the crime.”  

“True,” said M. Bouc, a little confused. “What then does the watch convey to you?” 

“If the hands were altered—I say if—then the time at which they were set must have a significance. The natural reaction would be to suspect anyone who had a reliable alibi for the time indicated—in this case, 1.15.” 

“Yes, yes,” said the doctor. “That reasoning is good.” 

“We must also pay a little attention to the time the intruder entered the compartment. When had he an opportunity of doing so? Unless we are to assume the complicity of the real conductor, there was only one time when he could have done so—during the time the train stopped at Vincovci. After the train left Vincovci the conductor was sitting facing the corridor, and whereas any one of the passengers would pay little attention to a Wagon Lit attendant, the one person who would notice an impostor is the real conductor. But during the halt at Vincovci the conductor is out on the platform. The coast is clear.” 

“And by our former reasoning, it must be one of the passengers,” said M. Bouc. “We come back to where we were. Which of them?” 

Poirot smiled. 

“I have made a list,” he said. “If you like to see it, it will perhaps refresh your memory.” 

The doctor and M. Bouc pored over the list together. It was written out neatly in a methodical manner in the order in which the passengers had been interviewed. 

HECTOR MACQUEEN, American subject, Berth No. 6, Second Class. 

Motive—Possibly arising out of association with dead man? 

Alibi—From midnight to 2 A.M. (Midnight to 1.30 vouched for by Col. 

Arbuthnot, and 1. 15 to 2 vouched for by conductor.) 

Evidence against him—None. 

Suspicious circumstances—None. CONDUCTOR PIERRE MICHEL, French subject. 

Motive—None. 

Alibi—From midnight to 2 A.M. (Seen by H. P. in corridor at same time as 

voice spoke from Ratchett’s compartment at 12.37. From 1 A.M. to 1.16 

vouched for by other two conductors.) 

Evidence against him—None. 

Suspicious circumstances—The Wagon Lit uniform found is a point in his favor 

since it seems to have been intended to throw suspicion on him. EDWARD MASTERMAN, English subject, Berth No. 4, Second Class. 

Motive—Possibly arising out of connection with deceased, whose valet he was. 

Alibi—From midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by Antonio Foscarelli.)  

Evidence against him of suspicious circumstances—None, except that he is the only man of the right height or size to have worn the Wagon Lit uniform. On the other hand, it is unlikely that he speaks French well. 

MRS. HUBBARD, American subject, Berth No. 3, First Class. Motive—None. Alibi—From midnight to 2 A.M.—None. Evidence against her or suspicious circumstances—Story of man in her 

compartment is substantiated by the evidence of Hardman and that of the woman Schmidt. 

GRETA OHLSSON, Swedish subject, Berth No. 10, Second Class. Motive—None. Alibi—From midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by Mary Debenham.) 

Note: Was last to see Ratchett alive. 

PRINCESS DRAGOMIROFF, Naturalised French subject, Berth No. 14, First Class. Motive—Was intimately acquainted with Armstrong family, and godmother to 

Sonia Armstrong. Alibi—from midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by conductor and maid.) Evidence against her or suspicious circumstances—None. 

COUNT ANDRENYI, Hungarian subject, Diplomatic passport, Berth No. 13, First Class. Motive—None. Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by conductor—this does not cover 

period from 1 to 1.15.) 

COUNTESS ANDRENYI, As above, Berth 12. Motive—None. Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M Took trional and slept. (Vouched for by husband. 

Trional bottle in her cupboard.) 

COLONEL ARBUTHNOT, British subject, Berth No. 15, First Class. Motive—None. Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. Talked with MacQueen till 1.30. Went to own 

compartment and did not leave it. (Substantiated by MacQueen and conductor.) Evidence against him or suspicious circumstances—Pipe-cleaner. 

CYRUS HARDMAN, American subject, Berth No. 16. Motive—None known. Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. Did not leave compartment. (Substantiated by 

conductor except for period 1 to 1.15.) Evidence against him or suspicious circumstances—None.  

ANTONIO FOSCARELLI, American subject (Italian by birth), Berth No. 5, Second Class. Motive—None known. Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by Edward Masterman.) Evidence against him or suspicious circumstances—None, except that weapon 

used might be said to suit his temperament (Vide M. Bouc.) 

MARY DEBENHAM, British subject, Berth No. 11, Second Class. Motive—None Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by Greta Ohlsson.) Evidence against him or suspicious circumstances—conversation overheard by 

H. P., and her refusal to explain it. HILDEGARDE SCHMIDT, German subject, Berth No. 8, Second Class. Motive—None. Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by conductor and her mistress.) Went 

to bed. Was aroused by conductor at 12.38 approx. and went to mistress. 

NOTE:—The evidence of the passengers is supported by the statement of the conductor that no one entered or left Mr. Ratchett’s compartment from midnight to 1 o’clock (when he himself went into the next coach) and from 1.15 to 2 o’clock. 

“That document, you understand,” said Poirot, “is a mere précis of the evidence 

we heard, arranged in that way for convenience.” With a grimace, M. Bouc handed it back. “It is not illuminating,” he said. “Perhaps you may find this more to your taste,” said Poirot, with a slight smile 

as he handed him a second sheet of paper.  

2 TEN QUESTIONS 

On the paper was written: 

THINGS NEEDING EXPLANATION 

1. The handkerchief marked with the initial H. Whose is it? 2. The pipe-cleaner. Was it dropped by Colonel Arbuthnot? Or by someone else? 3. Who wore the scarlet kimono? 4. Who was the man or woman masquerading in Wagon Lit uniform? 5. Why do the hands of the watch point to 1.15? 6. Was the murder committed at that time? 7. Was it earlier? 8. Was it later? 9. Can we be sure that Ratchett was stabbed by more than one person? 10.What other explanation of his wounds can there be? “Well, let us see what we can do,” said M. Bouc, brightening a little at this challenge to his wits. The handkerchief, to begin with. Let us by all means be orderly and methodical.” 

“Assuredly,” said Poirot, nodding his head in a satisfied fashion. 

M. Bouc continued somewhat didactically. The initial H is connected with three people—Mrs. Hubbard, Miss Debenham, whose second name is Hermione, and the maid Hildegarde Schmidt.” 

“Ah! And of those three?” 

“It is difficult to say. But I think I should vote for Miss Debenham. For all one knows she may be called by her second name and not her first. Also there is already some suspicion attaching to her. That conversation you overheard, mon cher, was certainly a little curious, and so is her refusal to explain it.” 

“As for me, I plump for the American,” said Dr. Constantine. “It is a very expensive handkerchief, that; and Americans, as all the world knows, do not care what they pay.” 

“So you both eliminate the maid?” asked Poirot. “Yes. As she herself said, it is the handkerchief of a member of the upper classes.”  

And the second question—the pipe-cleaner. Did Colonel Arbuthnot drop it, or somebody else?” 

“That is more difficult. The English, they do not stab. You are right there. I incline to the view that someone else dropped the pipe-cleaner—and did so to incriminate the long-legged Englishman.” 

“As you said, M. Poirot,” put in the doctor, “two clues is too much carelessness. I agree with M. Bouc. The handkerchief was a genuine oversight—hence none of the women will admit that it is hers. The pipe-cleaner is a faked clue. In support of that theory, you notice that Colonel Arbuthnot shows no embarrassment and admits freely to smoking a pipe and using that type of cleaner.” 

“You reason well,” said Poirot. 

“Question No. 3—Who wore the scarlet kimono!” went on M. Bouc. “As to that, I will confess I have not the slightest idea. Have you any views on the subject, Dr. Constantine?” 

“None.” 

“Then we confess ourselves beaten there. The next question has, at any rate, possibilities. Who was the man or the woman masquerading in Wagon Lit uniform? Well, one can list with certainty a number of people that it could not have been. Hardman, Colonel Arbuthnot, Foscarelli, Count Andrenyi and Hector MacQueen are all too tall. Mrs. Hubbard, Hildegarde Schmidt and Greta Ohlsson are too broad. That leaves the valet, Miss Debenham, Princess Dragomiroff and Countess Andrenyi—and none of them sounds likely! Greta Ohlsson in one case, and Antonio Foscarelli in the other, both swear that Miss Debenham and the valet never left their compartments. Hildegarde Schmidt swears that the Princess was in hers, and Count Andrenyi has told us that his wife took a sleeping draught. Therefore it seems impossible that it can be anybody—which is absurd!” 

“As our old friend Euclid says,” murmured Poirot. 

“It must be one of those four,” said Dr. Constantine. “Unless it is someone from outside who has found a hiding-place—and that we agreed was impossible.” 

M. Bouc had passed on to the next question on the list. “No. 5—Why do the hands of the broken watch point to 1.15? I can see two explanations of that. Either it was done by the murderer to establish an alibi, and afterwards, when he meant to leave the compartment, he was prevented by hearing people moving about; or else—wait—I have an idea coming—” 

The other two waited respectfully while M. Bouc struggled in mental agony. 

“I have it,” he said at last. “It was not the Wagon Lit murderer who tampered with the watch! It was the person we have called the Second Murderer—the lefthanded person—in other words the woman in the scarlet kimono. She arrives later and moves back the hands of the watch in order to make an alibi for herself.” 

“Bravo said Dr. Constantine. “It is well imagined, that.”  

“In fact,” said Poirot, “she stabbed him in the dark, not realizing that he was dead already, but somehow deduced that he had a watch in his pyjama pocket, took it out, put back the hands blindly, and gave it the requisite dent.” 

M. Bouc looked at him coldly. “Have you anything better to suggest, yourself?” he asked. “At the moment—no,” admitted Poirot. “All the same,” he went on, “I do not think you have either of you appreciated the most interesting point about that watch.” “Does question No. 6 deal with it?” asked the doctor. “To that question—Was the murder committed at that time, 1.15?—I answer No.” 

“I agree,” said M. Bouc. “’Was it earlier?’ is the next question. I say—Yes! You, too, doctor?” 

The doctor nodded. “Yes, but the question ‘Was it later?’ can also be answered in the affirmative. I agree with your theory, M. Bouc, and so, I think, does M. Poirot, although he does not wish to commit himself. The First Murderer came earlier than 1. 15, but the Second Murderer came after 1.15. And as regards the question of left-handedness, ought we not to take steps to ascertain which of the passengers is left-handed?” 

“I have not completely neglected that point,” said Poirot. “You may have noticed that I made each passenger write either a signature or an address. That is not conclusive, because some people do certain actions with the right hand and others with the left. Some write right-handed, but play golf left-handed. Still, it is something. Every person questioned took the pen in his or her right hand—with the exception of Princess Dragomiroff, who refused to write.” 

“Princess Dragomiroff—impossible,” said M. Bouc. 

“I doubt if she would have had the strength to inflict that left-handed blow,” said Dr. Constantine dubiously. ‘That particular wound had been inflicted with considerable force.” 

“More force than a woman could use?” 

“No, I would not say that. But I think more force than an elderly woman could display, and Princess Dragomiroff’s physique is particularly frail.” 

“It might be a question of the influence of mind over body,” said Poirot. “Princess Dragomiroff has great personality and immense will-power. But let us pass from that for the moment.” 

“To questions Nos. 9 and 10? Can we be sure that Ratchett was stabbed by more than one person, and what other explanation of the wounds can there be? In my opinion, medically speaking, there can be no other explanation of those wounds. To suggest that one man struck first feebly and then with violence, first with the right hand and then with the left, and after an interval of perhaps half an hour inflicted fresh wounds on a dead body—well, it does not make sense.”  

“No,” said Poirot. “It does not make sense. And you think that two murderers do make sense?” 

“As you yourself have said, what other explanation can there be?” 

Poirot stared straight ahead of him. “That is what I ask myself,” he said. “That is what I never cease to ask myself.” 

He leaned back in his seat. 

“From now on, it is all here.” He tapped himself on the forehead. “We have thrashed it all out. The facts are all in front of us—neatly arranged with order and method. The passengers have sat here, one by one, giving their evidence. We know all that can be known—from outside ... 

He gave M. Bouc an affectionate smile. 

“It has been a little joke between us, has it not—this business of sitting back and thinking out the truth? Well, I am about to put my theory into practice—here before your eyes. You two must do the same. Let us all three close our eyes and think. ... 

“One or more of those passengers killed Ratchett. Which of them?”  

3 CERTAIN SUGGESTIVE POINTS 

It was quite a quarter of an hour before anyone spoke. 

M. Bouc and Dr. Constantine had started by trying to obey Poirot’s instructions. They had endeavoured to see through a maze of conflicting particulars to a clear and outstanding solution. M. Bouc’s thoughts had run something as follows: “Assuredly I must think. But as far as that goes I have already thought. ... Poirot obviously thinks that this English girl is mixed up in the matter. I cannot help feeling that that is most unlikely. ... The English are extremely cold. Probably it is because they have no figures. ... But that is not the point. It seems that the Italian could not have done it—a pity. I suppose the English valet is not lying when he said the other never left the compartment? But why should he! It is not easy to bribe the English; they are so unapproachable. The whole thing is most unfortunate. I wonder when we shall get out of this. There must be some rescue work in progress. They are so slow in these countries ... it is hours before anyone thinks of doing anything. And the police of these countries, they will be most trying to deal with—puffed up with importance, touchy, on their dignity. They will make a grand affair of all this. It is not often that such a chance comes their way. It will be in all the newspapers. ...” 

And from there on, M. Bouc’s thoughts went along a well-worn course which they had already traversed some hundred times. 

Dr. Constantine’s thoughts ran thus: 

“He is queer, this little man. A genius? Or a crank? Will he solve this mystery? Impossible—I can see no way out of it. It is all too confusing. ... Everyone is lying, perhaps. ... But even then, that does not help one. If they are all lying, it is just as confusing as if they were speaking the truth. Odd about those wounds. I cannot understand it. ... It would be easier to understand if he had been shot—after all, the term ‘gunman’ must mean that they shoot with a gun. A curious country, America. I should like to go there. It is so progressive. When I get home I must get hold of Demetrius Zagone—he has been to America, he has all the modern ideas. ... I wonder what Zia is doing at this moment. If my wife ever finds out—” 

His thoughts went on to entirely private matters. ... Hercule Poirot sat very still. One might have thought he was asleep.  

And then, suddenly, after a quarter of an hour’s complete immobility his eyebrows began to move slowly up his forehead. A little sigh escaped him. He murmured beneath his breath. 

“But after all, why not? And if so—why, if so, that would explain everything.” 

His eyes opened. They were green like a cat’s. He said softly: “Eh bien. I have thought. And you?” 

Lost in their reflections, both men started violently. 

“I have thought also,” said M. Bouc, just a shade guiltily. “But I have arrived at no conclusion. The elucidation of crime is your métier, not mine, my friend.” 

“I, too, have reflected with great earnestness,” said the doctor, unblushingly recalling his thoughts from certain pornographic details. “I have thought of many possible theories, but not one that really satisfies me.” 

Poirot nodded amiably. His nod seemed to say: 

“Quite right. That is the proper thing to say. You have given me the cue I expected.” 

He sat very upright, threw out his chest, caressed his moustache and spoke in the manner of a practised speaker addressing a public meeting. 

“My friends, I have reviewed the facts in my mind, and have also gone over to myself the evidence of the passengers—with this result: I see, nebulously as yet, a certain explanation that would cover the facts as we know them. It is a very curious explanation, and I cannot be sure as yet that it is the true one. To find out definitely I shall have to make certain experiments. 

“I would like first to mention certain points which appear to me suggestive. Let us start with a remark made to me by M. Bouc in this very place on the occasion of our first lunch together on the train. He commented on the fact that we were surrounded by people of all classes, of all ages, of all nationalities. That is a fact somewhat rare at this time of year. The Athens-Paris and the Bucharest-Paris coaches, for instance, are almost empty. Remember also, the passenger who failed to turn up. He is, I think, significant. Then there are some minor points that strike me as suggestive—for instance, the position of Mrs. Hubbard’s sponge-bag, the name of Mrs. Armstrong’s mother, the detective methods of M. Hardman, the suggestion of M. MacQueen that Ratchett himself destroyed the charred note we found, Princess Dragomiroff’s Christian name, and a grease spot on a Hungarian passport.” 

The two men stared at him. 

“Do they suggest anything to you, those points?” asked Poirot. 

“Not a thing,” said M. Bouc frankly. 

“And M. le docteur?” 

“I do not understand in the least what you are talking of.”  

M. Bouc, meanwhile, seizing upon the one tangible thing his friend had mentioned, was sorting through the passports. With a grunt he picked up that of Count and Countess Andrenyi and opened it. “Is this what you mean? This dirty mark?” 

“Yes. It is a fairly fresh grease spot. You notice where it occurs?” 

“At the beginning of the description of the Count’s wife—her Christian name, to be exact. But I confess that I still do not see the point.” 

“I am going to approach it from another angle. Let us go back to the handkerchief found at the scene of the crime. As we stated not long ago, three people are associated with the letter H: Mrs. Hubbard, Miss Debenham and the maid, Hildegarde Schmidt. Now let us regard that handkerchief from another point of view. It is, my friends, an extremely expensive handkerchief—an objet de luxe, hand-made, embroidered in Paris. Which of the passengers, apart from the initial, was likely to own such a handkerchief? Not Mrs. Hubbard, a worthy woman with no pretensions to reckless extravagance in dress. Not Miss Debenham—that class of Englishwoman has a dainty linen handkerchief, not an expensive wisp of cambric costing perhaps two hundred francs. And certainly not the maid. But there are two women on the tram who would be likely to own such a handkerchief. Let us see if we can connect them in any way with the letter H. The two women I refer to are Princess Dragomiroff—” 

“Whose Christian name is Natalia,” put in M. Bouc ironically. 

“Exactly. And her Christian name, as I said just now, is decidedly suggestive. The other woman is Countess Andrenyi. And at once something strikes us—” 

“You!” 

“Me, then. Her Christian name on her passport is disfigured by a blob of grease. just an accident, anyone would say. But consider that Christian name. Elena. Suppose that, instead of Elena, it were Helena. That capital H could be turned into a capital E and then run over the small e next to it quite easily—and then a spot of grease dropped to cover up the alteration.” 

“Helena!” cried M. Bouc. “It is an idea, that.” 

“Certainly it is an idea! I look about for any confirmation, however slight, of my idea—and I find it. One of the luggage labels on the Countess’s baggage is slightly damp. It is one that happens to run over the first initial on top of the case. That label has been soaked off and put on again in a different place.” 

“You begin to convince me,” said M. Bouc. “But the Countess Andrenyi— surely—” 

“Ah, now, mon vieux, you must turn yourself round and approach an entirely different angle of the case. How was this murder intended to appear to everybody? Do not forget that the snow has upset all the murderer’s original plan. Let us  

imagine, for a little minute, that there is no snow, that the train proceeded on its normal course. What, then, would have happened? 

“The murder, let us say, would still have been discovered in all probability at the Italian frontier early this morning. Much of the same evidence would have been given to the Italian police. The threatening letters would have been produced by M. MacQueen; M. Hardman would have told his story; Mrs. Hubbard would have been eager to tell how a man passed through her compartment; the button would have been found. I imagine that two things only would have been different. The man would have passed through Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment just before one o’clock—and the Wagon Lit uniform would have been found cast off in one of the toilets.” 

“You mean?” 

“I mean that the murder was planned to look like an outside job. It would have been presumed that the assassin had left the train at Brod where it is timed to arrive at 0.58. Somebody would probably have passed a strange Wagon Lit conductor in the corridor. The uniform would be left in a conspicuous place so as to show clearly just how the trick had been played. No suspicion would have attached to the passengers. That, my friends, was how the affair was intended to appear to the outside world. 

“But the accident to the train changes everything. Doubtless we have here the reason why the man remained in the compartment with his victim so long. He was waiting for the train to go on. But at last he realised that the train was not going on. Different plans would have to be made. The murderer would now be known to be still on the train.” 

“Yes, yes,” said M. Bouc impatiently. “I see all that. But where does the handkerchief come in?” 

“I am returning to it by a somewhat circuitous route. To begin with, you must realise that the threatening letters were in the nature of a blind. They might have been lifted bodily out of an indifferently written American crime novel. They are not real. They are, in fact, simply intended for the police. What we have to ask ourselves is: ‘Did they deceive Ratchett?’ On the face of it, the answer seems to be No. His instructions to Hardman seem to point to a definite ‘private’ enemy, of whose identity he was well aware. That is, if we accept Hardman’s story as true. But Ratchett certainly received one letter of a very different character—the one containing a reference to the Armstrong baby, a fragment of which we found in his compartment. In case Ratchett had not realised it sooner, this was to make sure that he understood the reason of the threats against his life. That letter, as I have said all along, was not intended to be found. The murderer’s first care was to destroy it. This, then, was the second hitch in his plans. The first was the snow, the second was our reconstruction of that fragment.  

“That the note was destroyed so carefully can mean only one thing. There must be on the train someone so intimately connected with the Armstrong family that the finding of that note would immediately direct suspicion upon that person. 

“Now we come to the other two clues that we found. I pass over the pipecleaner. We have already said a good deal about that. Let us pass on to the handkerchief. Taken at its simplest it is a clue which directly incriminates someone whose initial is H, and it was dropped there unwittingly by that person.” 

“Exactly,” said Dr. Constantine. “She finds out that she has dropped the handkerchief and immediately takes steps to conceal her Christian name.” 

“How fast you go! You arrive at a conclusion much sooner than I would permit myself to do.” 

“Is there any other alternative?” 

‘Certainly there is. Suppose, for instance, that you have committed a crime and wish to cast the blame for it on someone else. Well, there is on the train a certain person connected intimately with the Armstrong family—a woman. Suppose, then, that you leave there a handkerchief belonging to that woman. She will be questioned, her connection with the Armstrong family will be brought out—et voilà: motive—and an incriminating article of evidence.” 

“But in such a case,” objected the doctor, “the person indicated, being innocent, would not take steps to conceal her identity.” 

“Ah, really? That is what you think? That is, truly, the opinion of the police court. But I know human nature, my friend, and I tell you that, suddenly confronted with the possibility of being tried for murder, the most innocent person will lose his head and do the most absurd things. No, no, the grease spot and the changed label do not prove guilt—they only prove that the Countess Andrenyi is anxious for some reason to conceal her identity.” 

“What do you think her connection with the Armstrong family can be? She has never been in America, she says.” 

“Exactly, and she speaks English with a foreign accent, and she has a very foreign appearance which she exaggerates. But it should not be difficult to guess who she is. I mentioned just now the name of Mrs. Armstrong’s mother. It was ‘Linda Arden,’ and she was a very celebrated actress—among other things a Shakespearean actress. Think of As You Like It, with the Forest of Arden and Rosalind. It was there she got the inspiration for her acting name. ‘Linda Arden,’ the name by which she was known all over the world, was not her real name. It may have been Goldenberg; it is quite likely that she had Central European blood in her veins—a strain of Jewish, perhaps. Many nationalities drift to America. I suggest to you, gentlemen, that that young sister of Mrs. Armstrong’s, little more than a child at the time of the tragedy, was Helena Goldenberg, the younger  

daughter of Linda Arden, and that she married Count Andrenyi when he was an 

attaché in Washington.” 

“But Princess Dragomiroff says that the girl married an Englishman.” 

“Whose name she cannot remember! I ask you, my friends, is that really likely? Princess Dragomiroff loved Linda Arden as great ladies do love great artists. She was godmother to one of the actress’s daughters. Would she forget so quickly the married name of the other daughter? It is not likely. No, I think we can safely say that Princess Dragomiroff was lying. She knew Helena was on the train, she had seen her. She realised at once, as soon as she heard who Ratchett really was, that Helena would be suspected. And so, when we question her as to the sister, she promptly lies—is vague, cannot remember, but ‘thinks Helena married an Englishman’—a suggestion as far away from the truth as possible.” 

One of the restaurant attendants came through the door at the end and approached them. He addressed M. Bouc. 

“The dinner, Monsieur, shall I serve it? It is ready some little time.” 

M. Bouc looked at Poirot. The latter nodded. “By all means, let dinner be served.” The attendant vanished through the doors at the other end. His bell could be heard ringing and his voice upraised: “Premier service. Le d.ner est servi. Premier d.ner—First service.”  

4 THE GREASE SPOT ON A HUNGARIAN PASSPORT 

Poirot shared a table with M. Bouc and the doctor. 

The company assembled in the restaurant car was a very subdued one. They spoke little. Even the loquacious Mrs. Hubbard was unnaturally quiet. She murmured as she sat: 

“I don’t feel as though I had the heart to eat anything,” and then partook of everything offered her, encouraged by the Swedish lady who seemed to regard her as a special charge. 

Before the meal was served, Poirot had caught the chief attendant by the sleeve and murmured something to him. Constantine made a pretty good guess as to what the instructions had been when he noticed that the Count and Countess Andrenyi were always served last and that at the end of the meat there was a delay in making out their bill. It therefore came about that the Count and Countess were the last left in the restaurant car. 

When they rose at length and moved in the direction of the door, Poirot sprang up and followed them. 

“Pardon, Madame, you have dropped your handkerchief.” 

He was holding out to her the tiny monogrammed square. 

She took it, glanced at it, then handed it back to him. “You are mistaken, Monsieur, that is not my handkerchief.” 

“Not your handkerchief? Are you sure?” 

“Perfectly sure, Monsieur.” 

“And yet, Madame, it has your initial—the initial H.” 

The Count made a sudden movement. Poirot ignored him. His eyes were fixed on the Countess’s face. 

Looking steadily at him she replied: 

“I do not understand, Monsieur. My initials are E. A.” 

“I think not. Your name is Helena—not Elena. Helena Goldenberg, the younger daughter of Linda Arden—Helena Goldenberg, the sister of Mrs. Armstrong.” 

There was a dead silence for a minute or two. Both the Count and the Countess had gone deadly white. 

Poirot said in a gentler tone: “It is of no use denying. That is the truth, is it not?” 

The Count burst out furiously, “I demand, Monsieur, by what right you—” 

She interrupted him, putting up a small hand towards his mouth.  

“No, Rudolph. Let me speak. It is useless to deny what this gentleman says. We had better sit down and talk the matter out.” 

Her voice had changed. It still had the southern richness of tone, but it had become suddenly more clear cut and incisive. It was, for the first time, a definitely American voice. 

The Count was silenced. He obeyed the gesture of her hand and they both sat down opposite Poirot. 

“Your statement, Monsieur, is quite true,” said the Countess. “I am Helena Goldenberg, the younger sister of Mrs. Armstrong.” 

“You did not acquaint me with that fact this morning, Madame la Comtesse.” 

“No.” 

“In fact, all that your husband and you told me was a tissue of lies.” 

“Monsieur!” cried the Count angrily. 

“Do not be angry, Rudolph. M. Poirot puts the fact rather brutally, but what he says is undeniable.” 

“I am glad you admit the fact so freely, Madame. Will you now tell me your reasons for that, and also for altering your Christian name on your passport?” 

“That was my doing entirely,” put in the Count. 

Helena said quietly: “Surely, M. Poirot, you can guess my reason—our reason. This man who was killed is the man who murdered my baby niece, who killed my sister, who broke my brother-in-law’s heart. Three of the people I loved best and who made up my home—my world!” 

Her voice rang out passionately. She was a true daughter of that mother the emotional force of whose acting had moved huge audiences to tears. 

She went on more quietly. 

“Of all the people on the train I alone had probably the best motive for killing him.” 

“And you did not kill him, Madame?” 

“I swear to you, M. Poirot—and my husband knows—and will swear also—that much as I may have been tempted to do so, I never lifted a hand against that man.” 

“I, too, gentlemen.” said the Count. “I give you my word of honour that last night Helena never left her compartment. She took a sleeping draught exactly as I said. She is utterly and entirely innocent.” 

Poirot looked from one to the other of them. 

“On my word of honour,” repeated the Count. 

Poirot shook his head slightly. 

“And yet you took it upon yourself to alter the name in the passport?” 

“Monsieur Poirot,” the Count said earnestly and passionately, “consider my position. Do you think I could stand the thought of my wife dragged through a sordid police case? She was innocent, I knew it, but what she said was true—  

because of her connection with the Armstrong family she would have been immediately suspected. She would have been questioned—attested, perhaps. Since some evil chance had taken us on the same train as this man Ratchett, there was, I felt sure, but one thing for it. I admit, Monsieur, that I lied to you—all, that is, save in one thing. My wife never left her compartment last night.” 

He spoke with an earnestness that it was hard to gainsay. 

“I do not say that I disbelieve you, Monsieur,” said Poirot slowly. “Your family is, I know, a proud and ancient one. It would be bitter indeed for you to have your wife dragged into an unpleasant police case. With that I can sympathise. But how then do you explain the presence of your wife’s handkerchief actually in the dead man’s compartment?” 

“That handkerchief is not mine, Monsieur,” said the Countess. 

“In spite of the initial H?” 

“In spite of the initial. I have handkerchiefs not unlike that, but not one that is exactly of that pattern. I know, of course, that I cannot hope to make you believe me, but I assure you that it is so. That handkerchief is not mine.” 

“It may have been placed there by someone in order to incriminate you?” 

She smiled a little. “You are enticing me to admit that, after all, it is mine? But indeed, M. Poirot, it isn’t.” She spoke with great earnestness. 

“Then why, if the handkerchief was not yours, did you alter the name in the passport?” 

The Count answered this. 

“Because we heard that a handkerchief had been found with the initial H on it. We talked the matter over together before we came to be interviewed. I pointed out to Helena that if it were seen that her Christian name began with an H she would immediately be subjected to much more rigorous questioning. And the thing was so simple—to alter Helena to Elena, was easily done.” 

“You have, M. le Comte, the makings of a very fine criminal,” remarked Poirot dryly. “A great natural ingenuity, and an apparently remorseless determination to mislead justice.” 

“Oh, no, no.” The girl leaned forward. “M. Poirot, he’s explained to you how it was.” She broke from French into English. “I was scared—absolutely dead scared, you understand. It had been so awful—that time—and to have it all raked up again. And to be suspected and perhaps thrown into prison. I was just scared stiff, M. Poirot. Can’t you understand at all?” 

Her voice was lovely—deep—rich—pleading, the voice of the daughter of Linda Arden the actress. 

Poirot looked gravely at her. 

“If I am to believe you, Madame—and I do not say that I will not believe you— then you must help me.”  

“Help you?” 

“Yes. The reason for the murder lies in the past—in that tragedy which broke up your home and saddened your young life. Take me back into the past, Mademoiselle, that I may find there the link that explains the whole thing.” 

“What can there be to tell you? They are all dead.” She repeated mournfully: “All dead—all dead—Robert, Sonia—darling, darling Daisy. She was so sweet— so happy—she had such lovely curls. We were all just crazy about her.” 

“There was another victim, Madame. An indirect victim, you might say.” 

“Poor Susanne? Yes, I had forgotten about her. The police questioned her. They were convinced that she had something to do with it. Perhaps she had—but if so only innocently. She had, I believe, chatted idly with someone, giving information as to the time of Daisy’s outings. The poor thing got terribly wrought up—she thought she was being held responsible.” She shuddered. “She threw herself out of the window. Oh! it was horrible.” 

She buried her face in her hands. 

“What nationality was she, Madame?” 

“She was French.” 

“What was her last name?” 

“It’s absurd, but I can’t remember—we all called her Susanne. A pretty, laughing girl. She was devoted to Daisy.” 

“She was the nursery-maid, was she not?” 

“Yes.” 

“Who was the nurse?” 

“She was a trained hospital nurse. Stengelberg her name was. She too was devoted to Daisy—and to my sister.” 

“Now, Madame, I want you to think carefully before you answer this question. Have you, since you were on this train, seen anyone that you recognised?” 

She stared at him. “I? No, no one at all.” 

“What about Princess Dragomiroff?” 

“Oh! her. I know her, of course. I thought you meant anyone—anyone from— from that time.” 

“So I did, Madame. Now think carefully. Some years have passed, remember. The person might have altered his or her appearance.” 

Helena pondered deeply. Then she said: “No—I am sure—there is no one.” 

“You yourself—you were a young girl at the time—did you have no one to superintend your studies or to look after you?” 

“Oh! yes, I had a dragon—a sort of governess to me and secretary to Sonia combined. She was English—or rather Scotch; a big red-haired woman.” 

“What was her name?” 

“Miss Freebody.”  

“Young or old?” 

“She seemed frightfully old to me. I suppose she couldn’t have been more than forty. Susanne, of course, used to look after my clothes and maid me.” 

“And there were no other inmates of the house?” 

“Only servants.” 

“And you are certain, quite certain, Madame, that you have recognised no one on the train?” 

She replied earnestly: “No one, Monsieur. No one at all.”  

5 

THE CHRISTIAN NAME OF PRINCESS DRAGOMIROFF 

When the Count and Countess had departed, Poirot looked across at the other two. 

“You see,” he said “we make progress.” 

“Excellent work,” said M. Bouc cordially. “On my part, I should never have dreamed of suspecting Count and Countess Andrenyi. I will admit I thought them quite hors de combat. I suppose there is no doubt that she committed the crime? It is rather sad. Still, they will not guillotine her. There are extenuating circumstances. A few years’ imprisonment—that will be all.” 

“In fact you are quite certain of her guilt.” 

“My dear friend—surely there is no doubt of it? I thought your reassuring manner was only to smooth things over till we are dug out of the snow and the police take charge.” 

“You do not believe the Count’s positive assertion—on his word of honor—that his wife is innocent?” 

“Mon cher—naturally—what else could he say? He adores his wife. He wants to save her! He tells his lie very well—quite in the grand seigneur manner. But what else than a lie could it be?” 

“Well, you know, I had the preposterous idea that it might be the truth.” 

“No, no. The handkerchief, remember. The handkerchief clinches the matter.” 

“Oh, I am not so sure about the handkerchief. You remember, I always told you that there were two possibilities as to the ownership of the handkerchief.” 

“All the same—” 

M. Bouc broke off. The door at the end had opened, and Princess Dragomiroff entered the dining-car. She came straight to them and all three men rose to their feet. She spoke to Poirot, ignoring the others. “I believe, Monsieur,” she said, “that you have a handkerchief of mine.” Poirot shot a glance of triumph at the other two. “Is this it, Madame?” He produced the little square of fine cambric. “That is it. It has my initial in the corner.” “But, Madame la Princesse, that is the letter H,” said M. Bouc. “Your Christian 

name—pardon me—is Natalia.” She gave him a cold stare.  

“That is correct, Monsieur. My handkerchiefs are always initialled in the Russian characters. H is N in Russian.” 

M. Bouc was somewhat taken aback. There was something about this indomitable old lady which made him feel flustered and uncomfortable. “You did not tell us that this handkerchief was yours at the inquiry this morning.” 

“You did not ask me,” said the Princess drily. 

“Pray be seated, Madame,” said Poirot. 

She sighed. “I may as well, I suppose.” She sat down. 

“You need not make a long business of this, Messieurs.” 

Your next question will be—How did my handkerchief come to be lying by a murdered man’s body! My reply to that is that I have no idea.” 

“You have really no idea?” 

“None whatever.” 

“You will excuse me, Madame, but how much can we rely upon the truthfulness of your replies?” 

Poirot said the words very softly. 

Princess Dragomiroff answered contemptuously. “I suppose you mean because I did not tell you that Helena Andrenyi was Mrs. Armstrong’s sister?” 

“In fact you deliberately lied to us in the matter.” 

“Certainly. I would do the same again. Her mother was my friend. I believe, Messieurs, in loyalty—to one’s friends and one’s family and one’s caste.” 

“You do not believe in doing your utmost to further the ends of justice?” 

“In this case I consider that justice—strict justice—has been done.” 

Poirot leaned forward. 

“You see my difficulty, Madame. In this matter of the handkerchief, even, am I to believe you? Or are you shielding your friend’s daughter?” 

“Oh! I see what you mean.” Her face broke into a grim smile. “Well, Messieurs, this statement of mine can be easily proved. I will give you the address of the people in Paris who make my handkerchiefs. You have only to show them the one in question and they will inform you that it was made to my order over a year ago. The handkerchief is mine, Messieurs.” 

She rose. 

“Have you anything further you wish to ask me?” 

“Your maid, Madame, did she recognise this handkerchief when we showed it to 

her this morning?” “She must have done so. She saw it and said nothing? Ah, well, that shows that she too can be loyal.” With a slight inclination of her head she passed out of the dining-car.  

“So that was it,” murmured Poirot softly. “I noticed just a trifling hesitation when I asked the maid if she knew to whom the handkerchief belonged. She was uncertain whether or not to admit that it was her mistress’s. But how does that fit in with that strange central idea of mine? Yes, it might well be.” 

“Ah!” said M. Bouc with a characteristic gesture. “She is a terrible old lady, that!” 

“Could she have murdered Ratchett?” asked Poirot of the doctor. 

He shook his head. 

“Those blows—the ones delivered with great force penetrating the muscle— never, never could anyone with so frail a physique inflict them.” 

“But the feebler ones?” 

“The feebler ones, yes.” 

“I am thinking,” said Poirot, “of the incident this morning when I said to her that the strength was in her will rather than in her arm. It was in the nature of a trap, that remark. I wanted to see if she would look down at her right or her left arm. She did neither. She looked at them both. But she made a strange reply. She said, ‘No, I have no strength in these. I do not know whether to be sorry or glad.’ A curious remark that. It confirms me in my belief about the crime.” 

“It did not settle the point about the left-handedness.” 

“No. By the way, did you notice that Count Andrenyi keeps his handkerchief in his right-hand breast pocket?” 

M. Bouc shook his head. His mind reverted to the astonishing revelations of the last half-hour. He murmured: “Lies—and again lies. It amazes me, the number of lies we had told to us this morning.” 

“There are more still to discover,” said Poirot cheerfully. 

“You think so?” 

“I shall be very much disappointed if it is not so.” 

“Such duplicity is terrible,” said M. Bouc. “But it seems to please you,” he added reproachfully. 

“It has this advantage,” said Poirot. “If you confront anyone who has lied with the truth, he will usually admit it—often out of sheer surprise. It is only necessary to guess right to produce your effect. 

“That is the only way to conduct this case. I select each passenger in turn, consider his or her evidence, and say to myself, ‘If so and so is lying, on what point is he lying, and what is the reason for the lie?’ And I answer, ‘If he is lying—if, you mark—it could only be for such a reason and on such a point.’ We have done that once very successfully with Countess Andrenyi. We shall now proceed to try the same method on several other persons.” 

“And supposing, my friend, that your guess happens to be wrong?”  

“Then one person, at any rate, will be completely freed from suspicion.” “Ah!—a process of elimination.” “Exactly.” “And whom do we tackle next?” “We are going to tackle that pukka sahib, Colonel Arbuthnot.”  

6 

A SECOND INTERVIEW WITH COLONEL ARBUTHNOT 

Colonel Arbuthnot was clearly annoyed at being summoned to the dining-car for a second interview. His face wore a most forbidding expression as he sat down and said: 

“Well?” 

“All my apologies for troubling you a second time,” said Poirot. “But there is still some information that I think you might be able to give us.” 

“Indeed? I hardly think so.” 

“To begin with, you see this pipe-cleaner?” 

“Yes.” 

“Is it one of yours?” 

“Don’t know. I don’t put a private mark on them, you know.” 

“Are you aware, Colonel Arbuthnot, that you are the only man amongst the passengers in the Stamboul-Calais carriage who smokes a pipe?” 

“In that case it probably is one of mine.” 

“Do you know where it was found?” 

“Not the least idea.” 

“It was found by the body of the murdered man.” 

Colonel Arbuthnot raised his eyebrows. 

“Can you tell us, Colonel Arbuthnot, how it is likely to have got there?” 

“If you mean, did I drop it there myself, no, I didn’t.” 

“Did you go into Mr. Ratchett’s compartment at any time?” 

“I never even spoke to the man.” 

“You never spoke to him and you did not murder him?” 

The colonel’s eyebrows went up again sardonically. 

“If I had, I should hardly be likely to acquaint you with the fact. As a matter of fact I didn’t murder the fellow.” 

“Ah, well,” murmured Poirot. “It is of no consequence.” 

“I beg your pardon?” 

“I said that it was of no consequence.” 

“Oh!” Arbuthnot looked taken aback. He eyed Poirot uneasily. 

“Because, you see,” continued the little man, “the pipe-cleaner, it is of no importance. I can myself think of eleven other excellent explanations of its presence.” 

Arbuthnot stared at him.  

“What I really wished to see you about was quite another matter,” went on Poirot. “Miss Debenham may have told you, perhaps, that I overheard some words spoken to you at the station of Konya?” 

Arbuthnot did not reply. 

“She said, ‘Not now. When it’s all over. When it’s behind us!’ Do you know to what those words referred?” 

“I am sorry, M. Poirot, but I must refuse to answer that question.” 

“Pourquoi?” 

The Colonel said stiffly, “I suggest that you ask Miss Debenham herself for the meaning of those words.” 

“I have done so.” 

“And she refused to tell you?” 

“Yes.” 

“Then I should think it would have been perfectly plain—even to you—that my lips are sealed.” 

“You will not give away a lady’s secret?” 

“You can put it that way, if you like.” 

“Miss Debenham told me that they referred to a private matter of her own.” 

“Then why not accept her word for it?” 

“Because, Colonel Arbuthnot, Miss Debenham is what one might call a highly suspicious character.” 

“Nonsense,” said the Colonel with warmth. 

“It is not nonsense.” 

“You have nothing whatever against her.” 

“Not the fact that Miss Debenham was companion governess; in the Armstrong household at the time of the kidnapping of little Daisy Armstrong?” 

There was a minute’s dead silence. 

Poirot nodded his head gently. 

“You see,” he said. “We know more than you think. If Miss Debenham is innocent, why did she conceal that fact? Why did she tell me that she had never been in America?” 

The Colonel cleared his throat. “Aren’t you possibly making a mistake?” 

“I am making no mistake. Why did Miss Debenham lie to me?” 

Colonel Arbuthnot shrugged his shoulders. “You had better ask her. I still think that you are wrong.” 

Poirot raised his voice and called. One of the restaurant attendants came from the far end of the car. 

“Go and ask the English lady in No. 11 if she will be good enough to come here.” 

“Bien, Monsieur.”  

The man departed. The four men sat in silence. Colonel Arbuthnot’s face looked as though it were carved out of wood, rigid and impassive. 

The man returned. 

“The lady is just coming, Monsieur.” 

“Thank you.” 

A minute or two later Mary Debenham entered the dining-car.  

7 

THE IDENTITY OF MARY DEBENHAM 

She wore no hat. Her head was thrown back as though in defiance. “The sweep of her hair back from her face, the curve of her nostril suggested the figure-head of a ship plunging gallantly into a rough sea. In that moment she was beautiful. 

Her eyes went to Arbuthnot for a minute—just a minute. She said to Poirot, “You wished to see me?” 

“I wished to ask you, Mademoiselle, why you lied to us this morning?” 

“Lied to you? I don’t know what you mean.” 

“You concealed the fact that at the time of the Armstrong tragedy you were actually living in the house. You told me that you had never been in America.” 

He saw her flinch for a moment and then recover herself. 

“Yes,” she said. “That is true.” 

“No, Mademoiselle, it was false.” 

“You misunderstood me. I mean that it is true that I lied to you.” 

“Ah, you admit it?” 

Her lips curved into a smile. “Certainly, since you have found me out.” 

“You are at least frank, Mademoiselle.” 

“There does not seem anything else for me to be.” 

“Well, of course, that is true. And now, Mademoiselle, may I ask you the reason for these evasions?” 

“I should have thought the reason leapt to the eye, M. Poirot.” 

“It does not leap to mine, Mademoiselle.” 

She said in a quiet even voice with a trace of hardness in it, “I have my living to get.” 

“You mean—?” 

She raised her eyes and looked him full in the face. “How much do you know, 

M. Poirot, of the fight to get and keep decent employment? Do you think that a girl who had been detained in connection with a murder case, whose name and perhaps photograph were reproduced in the English papers—do you think that any nice ordinary middle-class woman would want to engage that girl as governess to her daughters?” “I do not see why not—if no blame attached to you.” 

“Oh, blame—it is not blame—it is the publicity! So far, M. Poirot, I have succeeded in life. I have had well-paid, pleasant posts. I was not going to risk the position I had attained when no good end could have been served.”  

“I will venture to suggest, Mademoiselle, that I would have been the best judge of that, not you.” 

She shrugged her shoulders. 

“For instance, you could have helped me in the matter of identification.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“Is it possible, Mademoiselle, that you did not recognise in the Countess Andrenyi, Mrs. Armstrong’s young sister whom you taught in New York?” 

“Countess Andrenyi? No.” She shook her head. “It may seem extraordinary to you—but I did not recognise her. She was not grown up, you see, when I knew her. That was over three years ago. It is true that the Countess reminded me of someone; it puzzled me. But she looks so foreign—I never connected her with the little American schoolgirl. I only glanced at her casually when coming into the restaurant car, and I noticed her clothes more than her face.” She smiled faintly. “Women do! And then—well—I had my own preoccupations.” 

“You will not tell me your secret, Mademoiselle?” 

Poirot’s voice was very gentle and persuasive. 

She said in a low voice, “I can’t—I can’t.” 

And suddenly, without warning, she broke down, dropping her face down upon her outstretched arms and crying as though her heart would break. 

The Colonel sprang up and stood awkwardly beside her. 

“I—look here—” 

He stopped and turning round scowled fiercely at Poirot. 

“I’ll break every bone in your damned body, you dirty little whipper-snapper,” he said. 

“Monsieur,” protested M. Bouc. 

Arbuthnot had turned back to the girl. “Mary—for God’s sake—” 

She sprang up. “It’s nothing. I’m all right. You don’t need me any more, do you, 

M. Poirot? If you do, you must come and find me. Oh, what an idiot—what an idiot I’m making of myself!” She hurried out of the car. 

Arbuthnot, before following her, turned once more on Poirot. 

“Miss Debenham’s got nothing to do with this business—nothing, do you hear? And if she’s worried and interfered with, you’ll have me to deal with.” He strode out. 

“I like to see an angry Englishman,” said Poirot. “They are very amusing. The more emotional they feel, the less command they have of language.” 

But M. Bouc was not interested in the emotional reactions of Englishmen. He 

was overcome by admiration of his friend. “Mon cher, vous êtes épatant!” he cried. “Another miraculous guess.” “It is incredible how you think of these things,” said Dr. Constantine admiringly.  

“Oh, I claim no credit this time. It was not a guess. Countess Andrenyi practically told me.” 

“Comment? Surely not?” 

“You remember, I asked her about her governess or companion? I had already decided in my mind that if Mary Debenham were mixed up in the matter, she must have figured in the household in some such capacity.” 

“Yes, but the Countess Andrenyi described a totally different person.” 

“Exactly. A tall middle-aged woman with red hair—in fact, the exact opposite in every respect of Miss Debenham, so much so as to be quite remarkable. But then she had to invent a name quickly, and there it was that the unconscious association of ideas gave her away. She said, Miss Freebody, you remember.” 

“Yes?” 

“Eh bien, you may not know it, but there is a shop in London that was called until recently Debenham & Freebody. With the name Debenham running in her head, the Countess clutches at another name quickly, and the first that comes is Freebody. Naturally I understood immediately.” 

“That is yet another lie. Why did she do it?’ 

“Possibly more loyalty. It makes things a little difficult.” 

“Ma foi!” said M. Bouc with violence. “But does everybody on this train tell lies?” 

“That,” said Poirot, “is what we are about to find out.”  

8 FURTHER SURPRISING REVELATIONS 

“Nothing would surprise me now,” said M. Bouc. 

“Nothing! Even if everybody in the train proved to have been in the Armstrong household, I should not express surprise.” 

“That is a very profound remark,” said Poirot. “Would you like to see what your favorite suspect, the Italian, has to say for himself?” 

“You are going to make another of these famous guesses of yours?” 

“Precisely.” 

“It is really a most extraordinary case,” said Constantine. 

“No, it is most natural.” 

M. Bouc flung up his arms in comic despair. “If this is what you call natural, mon ami—” Words failed him. Poirot had by this time requested the dining-car attendant to fetch Antonio Foscarelli. The big Italian had a wary look in his eye as he came in. He shot nervous glances from side to side like a trapped animal. “What do you want!” he said. “I have nothing more to tell you—nothing, do you hear? Per Dio—” He struck his hand on the table. 

“Yes, you have something more to tell us,” said Poirot firmly. “The truth!” 

“The truth?” He shot an uneasy glance at Poirot. All the assurance and geniality had gone out of his manner. 

“Mais oui. It may be that I know it already. But it will be a point in your favour if it comes from you spontaneously.” 

“You talk like the American police. ‘Come clean’—that is what they say— ‘come clean.’ ” 

“Ah! so you have had experience of the New York police?” 

“No, no, never. They could not prove a thing against me—but it was not for want of trying.” 

Poirot said quietly: “That was in the Armstrong case, was it not? You were the chauffeur?” 

His eyes met those of the Italian. The bluster went out of the big man. He was 

like a pricked balloon. “Since you know—why ask me?” “Why did you lie this morning?”  

“Business reasons. Besides, I do not trust the Jugo-Slav police. They hate the Italians. They would not have given me justice.” 

“Perhaps it is exactly justice that they would have given you!” 

“No, no, I had nothing to do with this business last night. I never left my carriage. The long-faced Englishman, he can tell you so. It was not I who killed this pig—this Ratchett. You cannot prove anything against me.” 

Poirot was writing something on a sheet of paper. He looked up and said quietly: “Very good. You can go.” 

Foscarelli lingered uneasily. “You realise that it was not I? That I could have had nothing to do with it!” 

“I said that you could go.” 

“It is a conspiracy. You are going to frame me? All for a pig of a man who should have gone to the chair! It was an infamy that he did not. If it had been me— if I had been arrested—” 

“But it was not you. You had nothing to do with the kidnapping of the child.” 

“What is that you are saying? Why, that little one—she was the delight of the house. Tonio, she called me. And she would sit in the car and pretend to hold the wheel. All the household worshipped her! Even the police came to understand that. Ah, the beautiful little one!” 

His voice had softened. The tears came into his eyes. Then he wheeled round abruptly on his heel and strode out of the dining-car. 

“Pietro,” called Poirot. 

The dining-car attendant came at a run. 

“The No. 10—the Swedish lady.” 

“Bien, Monsieur.” 

“Another?” cried M. Bouc. “Ah, no—it is not possible. I tell you it is not possible.” 

“Mon cher—we have to know. Even if in the end everybody on the train proves to have had a motive for killing Ratchett, we have to know. Once we know, we can settle once for all where the guilt lies.” 

“My head is spinning,” groaned M. Bouc. 

Greta Ohlsson was ushered in sympathetically by the attendant. She was weeping bitterly. 

She collapsed on the seat facing Poirot and wept steadily into a large handkerchief. 

“Now do not distress yourself, Mademoiselle. Do not distress yourself,” Poirot patted her on the shoulder. “Just a few little words of truth, that is all. You were the nurse who was in charge of little Daisy Armstrong?” 

“It is true—it is true,” wept the wretched woman. “Ah, she was an angel—a little sweet trustful angel. She knew nothing but kindness and love—and she was  

taken away by that wicked man—cruelly treated—and her poor mother—and the other little one who never lived at all. You cannot understand—you cannot know— if you had been there as I was—if you had seen the whole terrible tragedy! I ought to have told you the truth about myself this morning. But I was afraid—afraid. I did so rejoice that that evil man was dead—that he could not any more kill or torture little children. Ah! I cannot speak—I have no words. ...” 

She wept with more vehemence than ever. 

Poirot continued to pat her gently on the shoulder. “There—there—I comprehend—I comprehend everything—everything, I tell you. I will ask you no more questions. It is enough that you have admitted what I know to be the truth. I understand, I tell you.” 

By now inarticulate with sobs, Greta Ohlsson rose and groped her way towards the door. As she reached it she collided with a man coming in. 

It was the valet—Masterman. 

He came straight up to Poirot and spoke in his usual quiet, unemotional voice’. 

“I hope I’m not intruding, sir. I thought it best to come along at once, sir, and tell you the truth. I was Colonel Armstrong’s batman in the War, sir, and afterwards I was his valet in New York. I’m afraid I concealed that fact this morning. It was very wrong of me, sir, and I thought I’d better come and make a clean breast of it. But I hope, sir, that you’re not suspecting Tonio in any way. Old Tonio, sir, wouldn’t hurt a fly. And I can swear positively that he never left the carriage all last night. So, you see, sir, he couldn’t have done it. Tonio may be a foreigner, sir, but he’s a very gentle creature. Not like those nasty murdering Italians one reads about.” 

He stopped. 

Poirot looked steadily at him. “Is that all you have to say?” 

“That is all, sir.” 

He paused; then, as Poirot did not speak, he made an apologetic little bow and after a momentary hesitation left the dining-car in the same quiet unobtrusive fashion as he had come. 

“This,” said Dr. Constantine, “is more wildly improbable than any roman policier I have ever read.” 

“I agree,” said M. Bouc. “Of the twelve passengers in that coach, nine have been proved to have had a connection with the Armstrong case. What next, I ask you? Or should I say, who next?” 

“I can almost give you the answer to your question,” said Poirot. “Here comes our American sleuth, Mr. Hardman.” 

“Is he, too, coming to confess?”  

Before Poirot could reply the American had reached their table. He cocked an alert eye at them and sitting down he drawled out: “Just exactly what’s up on this train? It seems bughouse to me.” 

Poirot twinkled at him. 

“Are you quite sure, Mr. Hardman, that you yourself were not the gardener at the Armstrong home?” 

“They didn’t have a garden,” replied Mr. Hardman literally. 

“Or the butler?” 

“Haven’t got the fancy manners for a place like that. No, I never had any connection with the Armstrong house—but I’m beginning to believe I’m about the only one on this train who hadn’t! Can you beat it? That’s what I say—can you beat it?” 

“It is certainly a little surprising,” said Poirot mildly. 

“C’est rigolo,” burst from M. Bouc. 

“Have you any ideas of your own about the crime, Mr. Hardman?” inquired Poirot. 

“No, sir. It’s got me beat. I don’t know how to figure it out. They can’t all be in it—but which one is the guilty party is beyond me. How did you get wise to all this? That’s what I want to know.” 

“I just guessed.” 

“Then, believe me, you’re a pretty slick guesser. Yes, I’ll tell the world you’re a slick guesser.” 

Mr. Hardman leaned back and looked at Poirot admiringly. 

“You’ll excuse me,” he said, “but no one would believe it to look at you. I take off my hat to you. I do indeed.” 

“You are too kind, M. Hardman.” 

“Not at all. I’ve got to hand it to you.” 

“All the same,” said Poirot, “the problem is not yet quite solved. Can we say with authority that we know who killed M. Ratchett?” 

“Count me out,” said Mr. Hardman. “I’m not saying anything at all. I’m just full of natural admiration. What about the other two you haven’t had a guess at yet? The old American dame, and the lady’s-maid? I suppose we can take it that they’re the only innocent parties on the train?” 

“Unless,” said Poirot, smiling, “we can fit them into our little collection as— shall we say—housekeeper and cook in the Armstrong household?” 

“Well, nothing in the world would surprise me now,” said Mr. Hardman with quiet resignation. “Bughouse—that’s what this business is—bughouse!” 

“Ah! mon cher, that would be indeed stretching coincidence a little too far,” said 

M. Bouc. “They cannot all be in it.” 

 

Poirot looked at him. “You do not understand,” he said. “You do not understand at all. Tell me, do you know who killed Ratchett?” 

“Do you?” countered M. Bouc. 

Poirot nodded. “Oh, yes,” he said. “I have known for some time. It is so clear that I wonder you have not seen it also.” He looked at Hardman and asked: “And you?” 

The detective shook his head. He stared at Poirot curiously. “I don’t know,” he said. “I don’t know at all. Which of them was it?” 

Poirot was silent a minute. Then he said: 

“If you will be so good, M. Hardman, assemble everyone here. There are two possible solutions of this case. I want to lay them both before you all.”  

9 

POIROT PROPOUNDS TWO SOLUTIONS 

The passengers came crowding into the restaurant car and took their seats round the tables. They all bore more or less the same expression, one of expectancy mingled with apprehension. The Swedish lady was still weeping, and Mrs. Hubbard was comforting her. 

“Now you must just take a hold on yourself, my dear. Everything’s going to be perfectly all right. You mustn’t lose your grip on yourself. If one of us is a nasty murderer, we know quite well it isn’t you. Why, anyone would be crazy even to think of such a thing. You sit here, and I’ll stay right by you—and don’t you worry any.” Her voice died away as Poirot stood up. 

The Wagon Lit conductor was hovering in the doorway. “You permit that I stay, Monsieur?” 

“Certainly, Michel.” 

Poirot cleared his throat. 

“Messieurs et mesdames, I will speak in English since I think all of you know a little of that language. We are here to investigate the death of Samuel Edward Ratchett—alias Cassetti. There are two possible solutions of the crime. I shall put them both before you, and I shall ask M. Bouc, and Dr. Constantine here to judge which solution is the right one. 

“Now you all know the facts of the case. Mr. Ratchett was found stabbed this morning. He was last known to be alive at 12.37 last night when he spoke to the Wagon Lit conductor through the door. A watch in his pyjama pocket was found to be badly dented, and it had stopped at a quarter past one. Dr. Constantine, who examined the body when found, puts the time of death as having been between midnight and two in the morning. At half an hour after midnight, as you all know, the train ran into a snowdrift. After that time it was impossible for anyone to leave the train. 

“The evidence of Mr. Hardman, who is a member of a New York detective agency—” (Several heads turned, to look at Mr. Hardman.)—“shows that no one could have passed his compartment (No. 16 at the extreme end) without being seen by him. We are therefore forced to the conclusion that the murderer is to be found among the occupants of one particular coach—the Stamboul-Calais coach. 

“That, I will say, was our theory.” 

“Comment?” ejaculated M. Bouc, startled.  

“But I will put before you an alternative theory. It is very simple. Mr. Ratchett had a certain enemy whom he feared. He gave Mr. Hardman a description of this enemy and told him that the attempt, if made at all, would most probably be made on the second night out from Stamboul. 

“Now I put it to you, ladies and gentlemen, that Mr. Ratchett knew a good deal more than he told. The enemy, as Mr. Ratchett expected, joined the train at Belgrade or else at Vincovci by the door left open by Colonel Arbuthnot and Mr. MacQueen, who had just descended to the platform. He was provided with a suit of Wagon Lit uniform, which he wore over his ordinary clothes, and a pass-key which enabled him to gain access to Mr. Ratchett’s compartment in spite of the door’s being locked. Mr. Ratchett was under the influence of a sleeping draught. This man stabbed him with great ferocity and left the compartment through the communicating door leading to Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment—” 

“That’s so,” said Mrs. Hubbard, nodding her head. 

“He thrust the dagger he had used into Mrs. Hubbard’s sponge-bag in passing. Without knowing it, he lost a button of his uniform. Then he slipped out of the compartment and along the corridor. He hastily thrust the uniform into a suitcase in an empty compartment, and a few minutes later, dressed in ordinary clothes, he left the train just before it started off, using the same means for egress—the door near the dining-car.” 

Everybody gasped. 

“What about that watch?” demanded Mr. Hardman. 

“There you have the explanation of the whole thing. Mr. Ratchett had omitted to put his watch back an hour as he should have done at Tzaribrod. His watch still registered Eastern European time, which is one hour ahead of Central European time. It was a quarter past twelve when Mr. Ratchett was stabbed—not a quarter past one.” 

“But it is absurd, that explanation!” cried M. Bouc. “What of the voice that spoke from the compartment at twenty-three minutes to one? It was either the voice of Ratchett—or else that of his murderer.” 

“Not necessarily. It might have been—well—a third person. One who had gone in to speak to Ratchett and found him dead. He rang the bell to summon the conductor; then, as you express it, the wind rose in him—he was afraid of being accused of the crime, and he spoke pretending to be Ratchett.” 

“C’est possible,” admitted M. Bouc grudgingly. 

Poirot looked at Mrs. Hubbard. “Yes, Madame, you were going to say—” 

“Well, I don’t quite know what I was going to say. Do you think I forgot to put my watch back too?”  

“No, Madame. I think you heard the man pass through—but unconsciously. Later you had a nightmare of a man being in your compartment and woke up with a start and rang for the conductor.” 

“Well, I suppose that’s possible,” admitted Mrs. Hubbard. 

Princess Dragomiroff was looking at Poirot with a very direct glance. “How do you explain the evidence of my maid, Monsieur?” 

“Very simply, Madame. Your maid recognised the handkerchief I showed her as yours. She somewhat clumsily tried to shield you. She did encounter the man, but earlier—while the train was at Vincovci station. She pretended to have seen him at a later hour, with a confused idea of giving you a water-tight alibi.” 

The Princess bowed her head. “You have thought of everything, Monsieur. I—I admire you.” 

There was a silence. 

Then everyone jumped as Dr. Constantine suddenly hit the table a blow with his fist. 

“But no,” he said. “No, no, and again no! That is an explanation that will not hold water. It is deficient in a dozen minor points. The crime was not committed so—M. Poirot must know that perfectly well.” 

Poirot turned a curious glance on him. “I see,” he said, “that I shall have to give you my second solution. But do not abandon this one too abruptly. You may agree with it later.” 

He turned back again to face the others. 

“There is another possible solution of the crime. This is how I arrived at it. 

“When I had heard all the evidence, I leaned back and shut my eyes, and began to think. Certain points presented themselves to me as worthy of attention. I enumerated these points to my two colleagues. Some I have already elucidated— such as a grease spot on a passport, and so on. I will run over the points that remain. The first and most important is a remark made to me by M. Bouc in the restaurant car at lunch on the first day after leaving Stamboul—to the effect that the company assembled was interesting because it was so varied—representing as it did all classes and nationalities. 

“I agreed with him, but when this particular point came into my mind, I tried to imagine whether such an assembly was ever likely to be collected under any other conditions. And the answer I made to myself was—only in America. In America there might be a household composed of just such varied nationalities—an Italian chauffeur, an English governess, a Swedish nurse, a German lady’s-maid, and so on. That led me to my scheme of ‘guessing’—that is, casting each person for a certain part in the Armstrong drama much as a producer casts a play. Well, that gave me an extremely interesting and satisfactory result.  

“I had also examined in my own mind each separate person’s evidence, with some curious results. Take first the evidence of Mr. MacQueen. My first interview with him was entirely satisfactory. But in my second he made rather a curious remark. I had described to him the finding of a note mentioning the Armstrong case. He said, ‘But surely—’ and then paused and went on, ‘I mean—that was rather careless of the old man.’ 

“Now I could feel that that was not what he had started out to say. Supposing what he had meant to say was ‘But surely that was burnt!’ In which case, MacQueen knew of the note and of its destruction—in other words, he was either the murderer or an accomplice of the murderer. Very good. 

“Then the valet. He said his master was in the habit of taking a sleeping draught when travelling by train. That might be true, but would Ratchett have taken one last night? The automatic under his pillow gave the lie to that statement. Ratchett intended to be on the alert last night. Whatever narcotic was administered to him must have been given without his knowledge. By whom? Obviously by MacQueen or the valet. 

“Now we come to the evidence of Mr. Hardman. I believed all that he told me about his own identity, but when it came to the actual methods he had employed to guard Mr. Ratchett, his story was neither more nor less than absurd. The only way to have protected Ratchett effectively was to pass the night actually in his compartment or in some spot where he could watch the door. The one thing that his evidence did show plainly was that no one in any other part of the train could possibly have murdered Ratchett. It drew a clear circle round the Stamboul-Calais carriage. That seemed to me a rather curious and inexplicable fact, and I put it aside to think over. 

“You probably all know by now of the few words I overheard between Miss Debenham and Colonel Arbuthnot. The interesting thing to my mind was the fact that Colonel Arbuthnot called her Mary and was clearly on terms of intimacy with her. But the Colonel was supposed to have met her only a few days previously. And I know Englishmen of the Colonel’s type—even if he had fallen in love with the young lady at first sight, he would have advanced slowly and with decorum, not rushing things. Therefore I concluded that Colonel Arbuthnot and Miss Debenham were in reality well acquainted and were for some reason pretending to be strangers. Another small point was Miss Debenham’s easy familiarity with the term ‘long distance’ for a telephone call. Yet Miss Debenham had told me that she had never been in the States. 

“To pass to another witness. Mrs. Hubbard had told us that lying in bed she had been unable to see whether the communicating door was bolted or not, and so had asked Miss Ohlsson to see for her. Now—though her statement would have been perfectly true if she had been occupying compartment No. 2, 4, 12 or any even  

number, in which the bolt is directly under the handle of the door—in the uneven numbers such as compartment No. 3 the bolt is well above the handle and could not therefore be masked by the sponge-bag in the least. I was forced to the conclusion that Mrs. Hubbard was inventing an incident that had never occurred. 

“And here let me say just a word or two about times. To my mind the really interesting point about the dented watch, is the place where it was found—in Ratchett’s pyjama pocket, a singularly uncomfortable and unlikely place to keep one’s watch, especially as there is a watch ‘hook’ provided just by the head of the bed. I felt sure, therefore, that the watch had been deliberately placed in the pocket—faked. The crime, then, was not committed at a quarter past one. 

“Was it then committed earlier? To be exact, at twenty-three minutes to one? My friend M. Bouc advanced as an argument in favour of it the loud cry which awoke me from sleep. But if Ratchett had been heavily drugged, he could not have cried out. If he had been capable of crying out, he would have been capable of making some kind of struggle to defend himself, and there were no signs of any such struggle. 

“I remembered that MacQueen had called attention, not once but twice (and the second time in a very blatant manner), to the fact that Ratchett could speak no French. I came to the conclusion that the whole business at twenty-three minutes to one was a comedy played for my benefit! Anyone might see through the watch business—it is a common enough device in detective stories. They assumed that I should see through it and that, pluming myself on my own cleverness, I would go on to assume that since Ratchett spoke no French, the voice I heard at twenty-three minutes to one could not have been his, and that Ratchett must have been already dead. But I am convinced that at twenty-three minutes to one Ratchett was still lying in his drugged sleep. 

“But the device has succeeded! I have opened my door and looked out. I have actually heard the French phrase used. If I am so unbelievably dense as not to realise the significance of that phrase, it must be brought to my attention. If necessary, MacQueen can come right out in the open. He can say, ‘Excuse me, M. Poirot, that can’t have been Mr. Ratchett speaking. He couldn’t speak French.’ 

“Now, what was the real time of the crime? And who killed him? 

“In my opinion—and this is only an opinion—Ratchett was killed at some time very close upon two o’clock, the latest hour the doctor gives us as possible. 

“As to who killed him—” 

He paused, looking at his audience. He could not complain of any lack of attention. Every eye was fixed upon him. In the stillness you could have heard a pin drop. 

He went on slowly:  

“I was particularly struck by the extraordinary difficulty of proving a case against any one person on the train, and by the rather curious coincidence that in each case the testimony giving an alibi came from what I might describe as an ‘unlikely’ person. Thus, Mr. MacQueen and Colonel Arbuthnot provided alibis for each other—two persons between whom it seemed most unlikely there should have been any prior acquaintanceship. The same thing happened with the English valet and the Italian, and with the Swedish lady and the English girl. I said to myself: This is extraordinary—they cannot all be in it! 

“And then, Messieurs, I saw light. They were all in it. For so many people connected with the Armstrong case to be travelling by the same train through coincidence was not only unlikely: it was impossible. It must be not chance, but design. I remembered a remark of Colonel Arbuthnot’s about trial by jury. A jury is composed of twelve people—there were twelve passengers—Ratchett was stabbed twelve times. And the thing that had worried me all along—the extraordinary crowd travelling in the Stamboul-Calais coach at a slack time of year—this was explained. 

“Ratchett had escaped justice in America. There was no question as to his guilt. I visualised a self-appointed jury of twelve people who had condemned him to death and who by the exigencies of the case had themselves been forced to be his executioners. And immediately, on that assumption, the whole case fell into beautiful shining order. 

“I saw it as a perfect mosaic, each person playing his or her allotted part. It was so arranged that, if suspicion should fall on any one person, the evidence of one or more of the others would clear the accused person and confuse the issue. Hardman’s evidence was necessary in case some outsider should be suspected of the crime and be unable to prove an alibi. The passengers in the Stamboul carriage were in no danger. Every minute detail of their evidence was worked out beforehand. The whole thing was a very cleverly planned jigsaw puzzle, so arranged that every fresh piece of knowledge that came to light made the solution of the whole more difficult. As my friend M. Bouc remarked, the case seemed fantastically impossible! That was exactly the impression intended to be conveyed. 

“Did this solution explain everything? Yes, it did. The nature of the wounds— each inflicted by a different person. The artificial threatening letters—artificial since they were unreal, written only to be produced as evidence. (Doubtless there were real letters, warning Ratchett of his fate, which MacQueen destroyed, substituting for them these others.) Then Hardman’s story of being called in by Ratchett—a lie, of course, from beginning to end. The description of the mythical ‘small dark man with a womanish voice’—a convenient description since it had the merit of not incriminating any of the actual Wagon Lit conductors and would apply equally well to a man or a woman.  

“The idea of stabbing is at first sight a curious one, but on reflection nothing else would fit the circumstances so well. A dagger was a weapon that could be used by everyone—strong or weak—and it made no noise. I fancy, though I may be wrong, that each person in turn entered Ratchett’s darkened compartment through that of Mrs. Hubbard—and struck! They themselves would never know which blow actually killed him. 

“The final letter which Ratchett had probably found on his pillow was carefully burnt. With no clue pointing to the Armstrong case there would be absolutely no reason for suspecting any of the passengers on the train. It would be put down as an outside job, and the ‘small dark man with the womanish voice’ would actually have been seen by one or more of the passengers leaving the train, at Brod! 

“I do not know exactly what happened when the conspirators discovered that this part of their plan was impossible owing to the accident to the train. There was, I imagine, a hasty consultation, and then they decided to go through with it. It was true that now one and all of the passengers were bound to come under suspicion, but that possibility had already been foreseen and provided for. The only additional thing to be done was to confuse the issue even further. Two so-called ‘clues’ were dropped in the dead man’s compartment—one incriminating Colonel Arbuthnot (who had the strongest alibi and whose connection with the Armstrong family was probably the hardest to prove); and the second clue, the handkerchief, incriminating Princess Dragomiroff who, by virtue of her social position, her particularly frail physique and the alibi given her by her maid and the conductor, was practically in an unassailable position. 

“Further to confuse the issue, a red herring was drawn across the trail—the mythical woman in the red kimono. Again I am to bear witness to this woman’s existence. There is a heavy bang at my door. I get up and look out—and see the scarlet kimono disappearing in the distance. A judicious selection of people—the conductor, Miss Debenham and MacQueen—will also have seen her. It was, I think, someone with a sense of humour who thoughtfully placed the scarlet kimono on the top of my suitcase whilst I was interviewing people in the dining-car. Where the garment came from in the first place, I do not know. I suspect it is the property of Countess Andrenyi, since her luggage contained only a chiffon negligee so elaborate as to be rather a tea-gown than a dressing-gown. 

“When MacQueen first learned that the letter which had been so carefully burnt had in part escaped destruction, and that the word Armstrong was exactly the word remaining, he must at once have communicated his news, to the others. It was at this minute that the position of Countess Andrenyi became acute, and her husband immediately took steps to alter the passport. It was their second piece of bad luck! 

“They one and all agreed to deny utterly any connection with the Armstrong family. They knew I had no immediate means of finding out the truth, and they did  

not believe that I should go into the matter unless my suspicions were aroused against one particular person. 

“Now there was one further point to consider. Allowing that my theory of the crime was the correct one, and I believed that it must be the correct one, then obviously the Wagon Lit conductor himself must be privy to the plot. But if so, that gave us thirteen persons, not twelve. Instead of the usual formula ‘Of so many people one is guilty,’ I was faced with the problem that of thirteen persons one and one only was innocent. Which was that person? 

“I came to a very odd conclusion. I came to the conclusion that the person who had taken no part in the crime was the person who would be considered the most likely to do so. I refer to Countess Andrenyi. I was impressed by the earnestness of her husband when he swore to me solemnly on his honour that his wife never left her compartment that night. I decided that Count Andrenyi took, so to speak, his wife’s place. 

“If so, then Pierre Michel was definitely one of the twelve. But how could one explain his complicity? He was a decent man who had been many years in the employ of the company—not the kind of man who could be bribed to assist in a crime. Then Pierre Michel must be involved in the Armstrong case. But that seemed very improbable. Then I remembered that the dead nursery-maid had been French. Supposing that that unfortunate girl had been Pierre Michel’s daughter. That would explain everything—it would also explain the place chosen for the staging of the crime. Were there any others whose part in the drama was not clear? Colonel Arbuthnot I put down as a friend of the Armstrongs. They had probably been through the War together. The maid, Hildegarde Schmidt—I could guess her place in the Armstrong household. I am, perhaps, over greedy, but I sense a good cook instinctively. I laid a trap for her—she fell into it. I said I knew she was a good cook. She answered: ‘Yes, indeed, all my ladies have said so.’ But if you are employed as a lady’s-maid your employers seldom have a chance of learning whether or not you are a good cook. 

“Then there was Hardman. He seemed quite definitely not to belong to the Armstrong household. I could only imagine that he had been in love with the French girl. I spoke to him of the charm of foreign women—and again I obtained the reaction I was looking for. Sudden tears came into his eyes, which he pretended were dazzled by the snow. 

“There remains Mrs. Hubbard. Now Mrs. Hubbard, let me say, played the most important part in the drama. By occupying the compartment communicating with that of Ratchett she was more open to suspicion than anyone else. In the nature of things she could not have an alibi to fall back upon. To play the part she played— the perfectly natural, slightly ridiculous American fond mother—an artist was  

needed. But there was an artist connected with the Armstrong family: Mrs. 

Armstrong’s mother—Linda Arden, the actress . ...” 

He stopped. 

Then in a soft rich dreamy voice, quite unlike the one she had used throughout the journey, Mrs. Hubbard said: 

“I always fancied myself in comedy parts.” 

She went on, still dreamily: 

“That slip about the sponge-bag was silly. It shows that you should always rehearse property. We tried it on the way out—I was in an even-number compartment then, I suppose. I never thought of the bolts being in different places.” 

She shifted her position a little and looked straight at Poirot. 

“You know all about it, M. Poirot. You’re a very wonderful man. But even you can’t quite imagine what it was like—that awful day in New York. I was just crazy with grief; so were the servants. And Colonel Arbuthnot was there too. He was John Armstrong’s best friend.” 

“He saved my life in the War,” said Arbuthnot. 

“We decided then and there (perhaps we were mad—I don’t know) that the sentence of death that Cassetti had escaped had got to be carried out. There were twelve of us—or rather eleven; Susanne’s father was over in France, of course. First we thought we’d draw lots as to who should do it, but in the end we decided on this way. It was the chauffeur, Antonio, who suggested it. Mary worked out all the details later with Hector MacQueen. He’d always adored Sonia—my daughter—and it was he who explained to us exactly how Cassetti’s money had managed to get him off. 

“It took a long time to perfect our plan. We had first to track Ratchett down. Hardman managed that in the end. Then we had to try and get Masterman and Hector into his employment—or at any rate one of them. Well, we managed that. Then we had a consultation with Susanne’s father. Colonel Arbuthnot was very keen on having twelve of us. He seemed to think it made it more in order. He didn’t like the stabbing idea much, but he agreed that it did solve most of our difficulties. Well, Susanne’s father was willing. Susanne had been his only child. We knew from Hector that Ratchett would be coming back from the East sooner or later by the Orient Express. With Pierre Michel actually working on that train, the chance was too good to be missed. Besides, it would be a good way of not incriminating any outsiders. 

“My daughter’s husband had to know, of course, and he insisted on coming on the train with her. Hector wangled it so that Ratchett selected the right day for travelling, when Michel would be on duty. We meant to engage every carriage in the Stamboul-Calais coach, but unfortunately there was one carriage we couldn’t  

get. It had been reserved long beforehand for a director of the company. ‘Mr. Harris,’ of course, was a myth. But it would have been awkward to have any stranger in Hector’s compartment. And then, at the last minute, you came. ...” 

She stopped. 

“Well,” she said, “you know everything now, M. Poirot. What are you going to do about it? If it must all come out, can’t you lay the blame upon me and me only? I would have stabbed that man twelve times willingly. It wasn’t only that he was responsible for my daughter’s death and her child’s and that of the other child who might have been alive and happy now. It was more than that: there had been other children kidnapped before Daisy, and there might be others in the future. Society had condemned him—we were only carrying out the sentence. But it’s unnecessary to bring all these others into it. All these good faithful souls—and poor Michel-and Mary and Colonel Arbuthnot—they love each other. ...” 

Her voice was wonderful, echoing through the crowded space—that deep, emotional, heart-stirring voice that had thrilled many a New York audience. 

Poirot looked at his friend. 

“You are a director of the company, M. Bouc,” he said. “What do you say?” 

M. Bouc cleared his throat. “In my opinion, M. Poirot,” he said, “the first theory you put forward was the correct one—decidedly so. I suggest that that is the solution we offer to the Jugo-Slavian police when they arrive. You agree, doctor?” 

“Certainly I agree,” said Dr. Constantine. “As regards the medical evidence, I think—er—that I made one or two fantastic suggestions.” “Then,” said Poirot, “having placed my solution before you, I have the honour to retire from the case. ...” 

THE END.