Authors Note
When I wrote "Foundation," which appeared in the May 1942 issue of Astounding Science Fiction, I had no idea that I had begun a series of stories that would eventually grow into six volumes and a total of 650,000 words (so far). Nor did I have any idea that it would be unified with my series of short stories and novels involving robots and my novels involving the Galactic Empire for a grand total (so far) of fourteen volumes and a total of about 1,450,000 words. You will see, if you study the publication dates of these books, that there was a twenty-five-year hiatus between 1957 and 1982, during which I did not add to this series. This was not because I had stopped writing. Indeed, I wrote full-speed throughout the quarter century, but I wrote other things. That I returned to the series in 1982 was not my own notion but was the result of a combination of pressures from readers and publishers that eventually became overwhelming.
In any case, the situation has become sufficiently complicated for me to feel that the readers might welcome a kind of guide to the series, since they were not written in the order in which (perhaps) they should be read. The fourteen books, all published by Doubleday, offer a kind of history of the future, which is, perhaps, not completely consistent, since I did not plan consistency to begin with. The chronological order of the books, in terms of future history (and not of publication date), is as follows:


1.    The Complete Robot (1982). This is a collection of thirty-one robot short stories published between 1940 and 1976 and includes every story in my earlier collection I Robot (1950). Only one robot short story has been written since this collection appeared. That is "Robot Dreams," which has not yet appeared in any Doubleday collection.

2.    The Caves of Steel (1954). This is the first of my robot novels.

3.    The Naked Sun (1957). The second robot novel.

4.    The Robots of Dawn (1983). The third robot novel.

5.    Robots and Empire (1985). The fourth robot novel.

6.    The Currents of Space (1952). This is the first of my Empire novels.

7.    The Stars, Like Dust (1951). The second Empire novel.

8.    Pebble in the Sky (1950). The third Empire novel.

9.    Prelude to Foundation (1988). This is the first Foundation novel (although it is the latest written, so far).

10.    Foundation (1951). The second Foundation novel. Actually, it is a collection of four stories, originally published between 1942 and 1944, plus an introductory section written for the book in 1949.

11.    Foundation and Empire (1952). The third Foundation novel, made up of two stories, originally published in 1945.

12.    Second Foundation (1953). The fourth Foundation novel, made up of two stories, originally published in 1948 and 1949.

13.    Foundations Edge (1982). The fifth Foundation novel.

14.    Foundation and Earth (1983). 
The sixth Foundation novel.

Will I add additional books to the series? I might. There is room for a book between Robots and Empire (5) and The Currents of Space (6) and between Prelude to Foundation (9) and Foundation (10) and of course between others as well. And then I can follow Foundation and Earth (14) with additional volumes--as many as I like.
Naturally, theres got to be some limit, for I dont expect to live forever, but I do intend to hang on as long as possible.
Mathematician
CLEON I-- ... The last Galactic Emperor of the Entun dynasty. He was born in the year 11,988 of the Galactic Era, the same year in which Hari Seldon was born. (It is thought that Seldons birthdate, which some consider doubtful, may have been adjusted to match that of Cleon, whom Seldon, soon after his arrival on Trantor, is supposed to have encountered.)
Having succeeded to the Imperial throne in 12,010 at the age of twenty-two, Cleon Is reign represented a curious interval of quiet in those troubled times. This is undoubtedly due to the skills of his Chief of Staff, Eto Demerzel, who so carefully obscured himself from public record that little is known about him.
Cleon himself ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

(All quotations from the Encyclopedia Galactica here reproduced are taken from the 116th Edition, published 1,020 FE by the Encyclopedia Galactica Publishing Co., Terminus, with permission of the publishers.)
作者的话
　　当我撰写“基地”这个故事的时候（它发表于“震撼科幻小说”一九四二年五月号），根本没想到竟为一系列的故事开了个头。目前为止，它已经扩展成六部小说，共计65万字。当时我也完全没有想到，它会跟我写的有关机器人的短篇与长篇系列，以及银河帝国的长篇统一起来，至今总共累积了十四部，共计145万字。
如果您研究这些书的出版日期，将会发现一九五七至一九八二年间有长达25年的断层，其间未曾为这个系列做任何补充。并非因为当时我中止写作，事实上，在这四分之一世纪问，我一直以全速写作，只不过我写的是别的东西。我会在一九八二年重拾这个系列，其实不是我自己的意思，而是来自读者与出版者的联合压力，最后终于变得无可抵御。
无论如何，如今情况已变得足够复杂，我想读者会欢迎见到对本系列的一个简介，因为它们不是依照应该阅读的顺序写出来的。
这十四部书都由“双日”出版，可谓展现了一部未来的历史。其中内容或许不算完全一致，因为最初我并未考虑到一致性。根据未来史的年代（而不是出版日期），这些书的顺序如下：
一、《机器人短篇全集》（一九八二年）：这是由发表于一九四○至一九七六年间的31个机器人短篇组成，包括较早的《我，机器人》（一九五○年）中的每个故事。自从这个全集问世后，我只再写了一个机器人短篇，那就是《机器人之梦》，它尚未收录在任何“双日”版选集中。
二、《钢穴》（一九五四年）：这是我的第一本机器人长篇。
三、《裸阳》（一九五七年）：第二本机器人长篇。
四、《曙光中的机器人》（一九八三年）：第三本机器人长篇。
五、《机器人与帝国》（一九八五年）：第四本机器人长篇。
六、《星空暗流》（一九五一年）：这是我的第一本帝国长篇。
七、《繁星若尘》（一九五一年）：第二本帝国长篇。
八、《苍穹微石》（一九五○年）：第=！本帝国长篇。
九、《基地前奏》（一九八八年）：这是基地长篇的第一本（但也是目前为止最后完成的一本）。
十、《基地》（一九五一年）：基地长篇的第二本。事实上，它是五个故事的合集，其中四个发表于一九四二至一九四四年间，再加上一九四九年为这本书而写的一篇引介。
十一、《基地与帝国》（一九五二年）：基地长篇的第三本．由两个故事组成，最初发表于一九四五年。
十二、《第二基地》（一九五三年）：基地长篇的第四本，由两个故事组成，最初发表于一九四八与一九四九年。
十三、《基地边缘》（一九八二年）：基地长篇的第五本。
十四、《基地与地球》（一九八六年）：基地长篇的第六本。
我会在这个系列中再多加几本吗？也许我会。在《机器人与帝国》（五）与《星空暗流》（六）之间，以及《基地前奏》（九）与《基地》（十）之间都能再插一本，当然其他各册之间也都有空间。此外我还能继《基地与地球》（十四）后再写下去——爱写几本就写几本。
自然，总该有某个限制存在，因为我并不指望永生，但我打算尽可能地继续下去。
译注一：其实《星空暗流》（六）与《繁星若尘》（七）的顺序应该交换，这想必是阿西莫夫一时的笔误。
译注二：1993年出版的《迈向基地》应插在《基地前奏》（九）与《基地》（十）之间。
Chapter 1
Suppressing a small yawn, Cleon said, "Demerzel, have you by any chance ever heard of a man named Hari Seldon?"
Cleon had been Emperor for just over ten years and there were times at state occasions when, dressed in the necessary robes and regalia, he could manage to look stately. He did so, for instance, in the holograph of himself that stood in the niche in the wall behind him. It was placed so that it clearly dominated the other niches holding the holographs of several of his ancestors. The holograph was not a totally honest one, for though Cleons hair was light brown in hologram and reality alike, it was a bit thicker in the holograph. There was a certain asymmetry to his real face, for the left side of his upper lip raised itself a bit higher than the right side, and this was somehow not evident in the holograph. And if he had stood up and placed himself beside the holograph, he would have been seen to be 2 centimeters under the 1.83-meter height that the image portrayed--and perhaps a bit stouter. Of course, the holograph was the official coronation portrait and he had been younger then. He still looked young and rather handsome, too, and when he was not in the pitiless grip of official ceremony, there was a kind of vague good nature about his face.
Demerzel said, with the tone of respect that he carefully cultivated, "Hari Seldon? It is an unfamiliar name to me, Sire. Ought I to know of him?"
"The Minister of Science mentioned him to me last night. I thought you might."
Demerzel frowned slightly, but only very slightly, for one does not frown in the Imperial presence. "The Minister of Science, Sire, should have spoken of this man to me as Chief of Staff. If you are to be bombarded from every side--"
Cleon raised his hand and Demerzel stopped at once. "Please, Demerzel, one cant stand on formality at all times. When I passed the Minister at last nights reception and exchanged a few words with him, he bubbled over. I could not refuse to listen and I was glad I had, for it was interesting."
"In what way interesting, Sire?"
"Well, these are not the old days when science and mathematics were all the rage. That sort of thing seems to have died down somehow, perhaps because all the discoveries have been made, dont you think? Apparently, however, interesting things can still happen. At least I was told it was interesting."
"By the Minister of Science, Sire?"
"Yes. He said that this Hari Seldon had attended a convention of mathematicians held here in Trantor--they do this every ten years, for some reason--and he said that he had proved that one could foretell the future mathematically."
Demerzel permitted himself a small smile. "Either the Minister of Science, a man of little acumen, is mistaken or the mathematician is. Surely, the matter of foretelling the future is a childrens dream of magic."
"Is it, Demerzel? People believe in such things."
"People believe in many things, Sire."
"But they believe in such things. Therefore, it doesnt matter whether the forecast of the future is true or not. If a mathematician should predict a long and happy reign for me, a time of peace and prosperity for the Empire--Eh, would that not be well?"
"It would be pleasant to hear, certainly, but what would it accomplish, Sire?"
"But surely if people believe this, they would act on that belief. Many a prophecy, by the mere force of its being believed, is transmuted to fact. These are self-fulfilling prophecies. Indeed, now that I think of it, it was you who once explained this to me."
Demerzel said, "I believe I did, Sire." His eyes were watching the Emperor carefully, as though to see how far he might go on his own. "Still, if that be so, one could have any person make the prophecy."
"Not all persons would be equally believed, Demerzel. A mathematician, however, who could back his prophecy with mathematical formulas and terminology, might be understood by no one and yet believed by everyone."
Demerzel said, "As usual, Sire, you make good sense. We live in troubled times and it would be worthwhile to calm them in a way that would require neither money nor military effort--which, in recent history, have done little good and much harm."
"Exactly, Demerzel," said the Emperor with excitement. "Reel in this Hari Seldon. You tell me you have your strings stretching to every part of this turbulent world, even where my forces dare not go. Pull on one of those strings, then, and bring in this mathematician. Let me see him."
"I will do so, Sire," said Demerzel, who had already located Seldon and who made a mental note to commend the Minister of Science for a job well done.

第一章
　　压下一个小小的哈欠后，克里昂开口道：“丹莫茨尔，你不会凑巧也听过一个叫哈里•谢顿的人吧？”
克里昂继承皇位刚超过十年，在一些国家大典上，当他穿上不可须臾离身的皇袍，佩上象征皇室的饰物，看起来也能显得冠冕堂皇。举例而言，他身后壁凹中那尊全息立像便是如此。这个立像显然摆在最突出的位置，令其他壁凹中几位先人的全息像相形见绌。
这尊全息像并非完全写实。例如它的头发虽然也是淡褐色，看来与真实的克里昂无异，却稍嫌浓密一点。克里昂真正的脸庞有些不对称，上唇左边比右边高些，这点在全息像中不怎么明显。此外，假如硕跃起身来，走到自己的全息像旁，旁人便能看出他比身高一米八三的影像矮了二厘米——或许还丰满一点。
当然。这个全息像是加冕典礼的正式定装照，况且当时他比较年轻。如今，他看来依然年轻，而且相当英俊，在没有宫廷礼节的无情束缚时，脸上也会露出一种含糊的和善表情。
丹莫茨尔以细心揣摩出的恭敬语调说：“哈里•谢顿？回陛下，这个名字我不熟悉。我应该认识他吗？”
“科学部长昨晚跟我提到这个人，我想你或许听说过。”
丹萸茨尔轻轻皱了皱眉头，但那只是很轻的一蹙，因为在圣驾面前不应有此举动。“陛下，科学部长应该跟我这位行政首长淡及此人。假如上上下下所有人都对您疲劳轰炸……”
克里昂举起手来，丹莫茨尔立刻闭嘴。“拜托，丹莫茨尔，你不能一天到晚要求别人中规中矩。在昨晚的欢迎会上，我经过那位部长身边，跟他闲谈了几句，他就谈兴大发，一发而不可收拾。我无法拒绝听下去，而我很高兴听到那番话，因为实在很有意思。”
“怎样有意思，陛下？”
“嗯，时代变了，科学和数学不再像以往那么时兴。那些东西似乎多少已经过时，也许因为能发现的都被发现了，不是吗？不过，有意思的事显然还是会发生，至少他是这么告诉我的。”
“科学部长吗，陛下？”
“没错。他说这个哈里•谢顿参加了一个在我们川陀举行的数学家会议。基于某种原因，这个会议每十年举行一次。他声称自己已经证明，人类可以利用数学预测未来。”
丹莫茨尔故意露出一抹微笑。“科学部长这个人并不怎么精明，不是他弄错的话，就是这个数学家错了。不用说，预测未来这种事是只有小孩才相信的把戏。”
“是吗，丹莫茨尔？民众相信这种事情？”
“民众相信很多事情，陛下。”
“可是他们的确相信这种事情，因此，对未来的预测是否正确其实并不重要。假如一名数学家作出预测。说我能带来长治久安，说帝国将有一段太平繁荣的岁月——呃，这难道不好吗？”
“当然，这种说法听起来很舒服，可是又有什么用呢，陛下？”
“只要民众深信不疑，自然就会依据这个信念行动。许多预言最后终于成真，唯一的凭借只是信心的力量，这就是所谓的‘自我实现的预言’。没错，现在我想起来了，当初对我解释这点的就是你。”
丹莫茨尔说：“我相信自己是这么说过，陛下。”他的眼睛小心翼翼地望着皇上，似乎在斟酌自己该再说多少。“话说回来，果真如此的话，任何人做预言都没有两样。”
“不是每个人都能令民众同样信服，丹莫茨尔。然而，数学家却能用数学公式和术语来支持他的预言。却使谁也不了解他说些什么，大家仍会深信不疑。”
丹莫茨尔说：“陛下，您说的总是很有道理。我们生在一个动荡的时代，值得用一种既不费钱，又不必采取军事行动的方式稳定人心。反观近代史，军事行动总是弄巧成拙，不但没什么成效，反而造成很大伤害。”
“正是如此，丹莫茨尔。”皇帝兴奋地说，“把这个哈里•谢顿带来。你说你在这个纷乱的世界上布满眼线，甚至连我的军队都退避三舍的地方也不例外。那么抽回一根线吧，把这个数学家带来，让我见见他。”
“我立即去办，陛下。”丹莫茨尔说。其实他早已查出谢顿的下落。他在心中记下一条备忘，准备嘉奖科学部长的优秀表现。
Chapter 2
Hari Seldon did not make an impressive appearance at this time. Like the Emperor Cleon I, he was thirty-two years old, but he was only 1.73 meters tall. His face was smooth and cheerful, his hair dark brown, almost black, and his clothing had the unmistakable touch of provinciality about it. To anyone in later times who knew of Hari Seldon only as a legendary demigod, it would seem almost sacrilegious for him not to have white hair, not to have an old lined face, a quiet smile radiating wisdom, not to be seated in a wheelchair. Even then, in advanced old age, his eyes had been cheerful, however. There was that.
And his eyes were particularly cheerful now, for his paper had been given at the Decennial Convention. It had even aroused some interest in a distant sort of way and old Osterfith had nodded his head at him and had said, "Ingenious, young man. Most ingenious." Which, coming from Osterfith, was satisfactory. Most satisfactory.
But now there was a new--and quite unexpected--development and Seldon wasnt sure whether it should increase his cheer and intensify his satisfaction or not. He stared at the tall young man in uniform--the Spaceship-and-Sun neatly placed on the left side of his tunic.
"Lieutenant Alban Wellis," said the officer of the Emperors Guard before putting away his identification. "Will you come with me now, sir?"
Wellis was armed, of course. There were two other Guardsmen waiting outside his door. Seldon knew he had no choice, for all the others careful politeness, but there was no reason he could not seek information. He said, "To see the Emperor?"
"To be brought to the Palace, sir. Thats the extent of my instructions."
"But why?"
"I was not told why, sir. And I have my strict instructions that you must come with me--one way or another."
"But this seems as though I am being arrested. I have done nothing to warrant that."
"Say, rather, that it seems you are being given an escort of honor--if you delay me no further."
Seldon delayed no further. He pressed his lips together, as though to block of further questions, nodded his head, and stepped forward. Even if he was going to meet the Emperor and to receive Imperial commendation, he found no joy in it. He was for the Empire--that is, for the worlds of humanity in peace and union but he was not for the Emperor.
The lieutenant walked ahead, the other two behind. Seldon smiled at those he passed and managed to look unconcerned. Outside the hotel they climbed into an official ground-car. (Seldon ran his hand over the upholstery; he had never been in anything so ornate.)
They were in one of the wealthiest sections of Trantor. The dome was high enough here to give a sensation of being in the open and one could swear--even one such as Hari Seldon, who had been born and brought up on an open world--that they were in sunlight. You could see no sun and no shadows, but the air was light and fragrant.
And then it passed and the dome curved down and the walls narrowed in and soon they were moving along an enclosed tunnel, marked periodically with the Spaceship-and-Sun and so clearly reserved (Seldon thought) for official vehicles.
A door opened and the ground-car sped through. When the door closed behind them, they were in the open--the true, the real open. There were 250 square kilometers of the only stretch of open land on Trantor and on it stood the Imperial Palace. Seldon would have liked a chance to wander through that open land--not because of the Palace, but because it also contained the Galactic University and, most intriguing of all, the Galactic Library.
And yet, in passing from the enclosed world of Trantor into the open patch of wood and parkland, he had passed into a world in which clouds dimmed the sky and a chill wind rued his shirt. He pressed the contact that closed the ground-cars window.
It was a dismal day outside.
第二章
　　这个时期的哈里•谢顿貌不惊人。与克里昂大帝一世一样，他也是二十二岁，不过他的身高只有一米七二。他的脸庞光润，显得快活爽朗，头发是接近黑色的深褐色，衣着带着一种一眼就能看出的土气。
对于那些将哈里•谢顿视为传奇性半人半神的后人而言，谢顿此刻的形象——没有满头白发、没有布满皱纹的老脸、没有放射智慧光芒的微笑、没有坐在轮椅上——似乎是一种亵渎。不过，即使到了耄耋高龄，谢顿的双眼依旧散发着愉悦的神采，那是他始终不变的特征。
此时此刻，他的一双眼睛显得特别愉悦，因为他刚在“十年会议”上发表一篇论文。这篇论文多少引起些许注意，老欧斯特费兹甚至对他点了点头，说道：“有创意，年轻人，实在有创意。”这句话出自欧斯特费兹之口，令他倍觉受用，心中的成就感无以复加。
可是现在却有一个新的而且相当出乎意料的发展，谢顿不知道它是否会让自己更加愉悦、更有成就感。
他瞪着眼前这位人高马大、身穿制服的年轻人。那人的短袖上衣左胸处，有一个帅气的“星舰与太阳”标志。
“艾尔本•卫利斯中尉。”这位禁卫军军官说着便将身份证件收起来。“请您这就跟我走好吗，阁下？”
当然，卫利斯是武装前来的，此外还有两名禁卫军等在门外。谢顿知道自己别无选择，虽然对方刻意表现得很礼貌。但无论如何，他总有权把事情弄清楚，于是他说：“去见皇上？”
“前往皇宫，阁下，我接到的指示仅止于此。”
“可是为什么呢？”
“我并不知情，阁下。我接到严格的指示，一定要您跟我前去，无论使用什么方法。”
“可是这样一来，好像是我遭到逮捕，而我没有犯什么法。”
“应该这么说，这像是我们在为您护驾——如果您不再耽误时间的话。”
谢顿果然未再耽搁。他紧闭嘴唇，仿佛将其他的疑问全部封在嘴里，点了点头，便迈开脚步。即使他真要去见皇上，接受皇上的嘉奖，他也不觉得有什么好高兴的。他的努力是为了整个帝国，换句话说，是为了所有人类世界的和平与团结，而不是为了这个皇帝。
中尉走在前面，另外两名禁卫军殿后。谢顿对擦身而过的每个人报以微笑，故意装得若无其事的样子。走出旅馆之后，他们登上一辆官方地面车（谢顿不禁伸手摸了摸椅套，他从未坐过这么豪华的车子）。
他们所在的地点是川陀最富有的地区之一。这里的穹顶相当高耸，足以带来置身露天空间的感觉。任何人都会发誓自己正沐浴在阳光之下，连生长在露天世界的哈里•谢顿也不例外。虽然见不到太阳或任何阴影，空气却显得明朗而清香。
随着周遭的景物迅速后退，穹顶开始往下弯，墙壁也变得越来越窄。他们很快就进入一座密闭的隧道，里面每隔固定距离便出现一个“星舰与太阳”的标志。这隧道显然（谢顿心想）专供官方交通工具使用。
前面一道门及时打开，地面车快速穿过。那道门重新关上之后，他们已经来到露天的空间——真正的露天空间。这里是川陀表面仅有的二百五十平方公里露天地表，壮丽的皇宫即坐落其上。谢顿很希望有机会在这片土地上明处逛逛——并非由于皇宫，而是因为这里有帝国大学，以及最吸引他的帝国图书馆。
然而，穿过川陀密封在穹顶内的世界，来到露天的林地与原野之后，他发现自己置身于一个乌云遮日的世界，一阵寒风猛然袭来。他随手按下开关，把车窗关了起来。
外面是个阴冷的日子。

Chapter 3

Seldon was not at all sure he would meet the Emperor. At best, he would meet some official in the fourth or fifth echelon who would claim to speak for the Emperor.
How many people ever did see the Emperor? In person, rather than on holovision? How many people saw the real, tangible Emperor, an Emperor who never left the Imperial grounds that he, Seldon, was now rolling over. The number was vanishingly small. Twenty-five million inhabited worlds, each with its cargo of a billion human beings or more--and among all those quadrillions of human beings, how many had, or would ever, lay eyes on the living Emperor. A thousand?
And did anyone care? The Emperor was no more than a symbol of Empire, like the Spaceship-and-Sun but far less pervasive, far less real. It was his soldiers and his officials, crawling everywhere, that now represented an Empire that had become a dead weight upon its people--not the Emperor.
So it was that when Seldon was ushered into a moderately sized, lavishly furnished room and found a young-looking man sitting on the edge of a table in a windowed alcove, one foot on the ground and one swinging over the edge, he found himself wondering that any official should be looking at him in so blandly good-natured a way. He had already experienced the fact, over and over, that government officials--and particularly those in the Imperial service--looked grave at all times, as though bearing the weight of the entire Galaxy on their shoulders. And it seemed the lower in importance they were, the graver and more threatening their expression.
This, then, might be an official so high in the scale, with the sun of power so bright upon him, that he felt no need of countering it with clouds of frowning. Seldon wasnt sure how impressed he ought to be, but he felt that it would be best to remain silent and let the other speak first. The official said, "You are Hari Seldon, I believe. The mathematician."
Seldon responded with a minimal "Yes, sir," and waited again.
The young man waved an arm. "It should be Sire, but I hate ceremony. Its all I get and I weary of it. We are alone, so I will pamper myself and eschew ceremony. Sit down, professor."
Halfway through the speech, Seldon realized that he was speaking to the Emperor Cleon, First of that Name, and he felt the wind go out of him. There was a faint resemblance (now that he looked) to the official holograph that appeared constantly in the news, but in that holograph, Cleon was always dressed imposingly, seemed taller, nobler, frozen-faced. And here he was, the original of the holograph, and somehow he appeared to be quite ordinary.
Seldon did not budge.
The Emperor frowned slightly and, with the habit of command present even in the attempt to abolish it, at least temporarily, said peremptorily, "I said, Sit down, man. That chair. Quickly."
Seldon sat down, quite speechless. He could not even bring himself to say, "Yes, Sire."
Cleon smiled. "Thats better. Now we can talk like two fellow human beings, which, after all, is what we are once ceremony is removed. Eh, my man?"
Seldon said cautiously, "If Your Imperial Majesty is content to say so, then it is so."
"Oh, come, why are you so cautious? I want to talk to you on equal terms. It is my pleasure to do so. Humor me."
"Yes, Sire."
"A simple Yes, man. Is there no way I can reach you?"
Cleon stared at Seldon and Seldon thought it was a lively and interested stare.
Finally the Emperor said, "You dont look like a mathematician."
At last, Seldon found himself able to smile. "I dont know what a mathematician is suppose to look like, Your Imp--"
Cleon raised a cautioning hand and Seldon choked off the honorific. Cleon said, "White-haired, I suppose. Bearded, perhaps. Old, certainly."
"Yet even mathematicians must be young to begin with."
"But they are then without reputation. By the time they obtrude themselves on the notice of the Galaxy, they are as I have described."
"I am without reputation, Im afraid."
"Yet you spoke at this convention they held here."
"A great many of us did. Some were younger than myself. Few of us were granted any attention whatever."
"Your talk apparently attracted the attention of some of my officials. I am given to understand that you believe it possible to predict the future."
Seldon suddenly felt weary. It seemed as though this misinterpretation of his theory was constantly going to occur. Perhaps he should not have presented his paper.
He said, "Not quite, actually. What I have done is much more limited than that. In many systems, the situation is such that under some conditions chaotic events take place. That means that, given a particular starting point, it is impossible to predict outcomes. This is true even in some quite simple systems, but the more complex a system, the more likely it is to become chaotic. It has always been assumed that anything as complicated as human society would quickly become chaotic and, therefore, unpredictable. What I have done, however, is to show that, in studying human society, it is possible to choose a starting point and to make appropriate assumptions that will suppress the chaos. That will make it possible to predict the future, not in full detail, of course, but in broad sweeps; not with certainty, but with calculable probabilities."
The Emperor, who had listened carefully, said, "But doesnt that mean that you have shown how to predict the future?"
"Again, not quite. I have showed that it is theoretically possible, but no more. To do more, we would actually have to choose a correct starting point, make correct assumptions, and then find ways of carrying through calculations in a finite time. Nothing in my mathematical argument tells us how to do any of this. And even if we could do it all, we would, at best, only assess probabilities. That is not the same as predicting the future; it is merely a guess at what is likely to happen. Every successful politician, businessman, or human being of any calling must make these estimates of the future and do it fairly well or he or she would not be successful."
"They do it without mathematics."
"True. They do it by intuition."
"With the proper mathematics, anyone would be able to assess the probabilities. It wouldnt take the rare human being who is successful because of a remarkable intuitive sense."
"True again, but I have merely shown that mathematical analysis is possible; I have not shown it to be practical."
"How can something be possible, yet not practical?"
"It is theoretically possible for me to visit each world of the Galaxy and greet each person on each world. However, it would take far longer to do this than I have years to live and, even if I was immortal, the rate at which new human beings are being born is greater than the rate at which I could interview the old and, even more to the point, old human beings would die in great numbers before I could ever get to them."
"And is this sort of thing true of your mathematics of the future?" Seldon hesitated, then went on. "It might be that the mathematics would take too long to work out, even if one had a computer the size of the Universe working at hyperspatial velocities. By the time any answer had been received, enough years would have elapsed to alter the situation so grossly as to make the answer meaningless."
"Why cannot the process be simplified?" Cleon asked sharply.
"Your Imperial Majesty,"--Seldon felt the Emperor growing more formal as the answers grew less to his liking and responded with greater formality of his own, "consider the manner in which scientists have dealt with subatomic particles. There are enormous numbers of these, each moving or vibrating in random and unpredictable manner, but this chaos turns out to have an underlying order, so that we can work out a quantum mechanics that answers all the questions we know how to ask. In studying society, we place human beings in the place of subatomic particles, but now there is the added factor of the human mind. Particles move mindlessly; human beings do not. To take into account the various attitudes and impulses of mind adds so much complexity that there lacks time to take care of all of it."
"Could not mind, as well as mindless motion, have an underlying order?"
"Perhaps. My mathematical analysis implies that order must underlie everything, however disorderly it may appear to be, but it does not give any hint as to how this underlying order may be found. Consider--Twenty-five million worlds, each with its overall characteristics and culture, each being significantly different from all the rest, each containing a billion or more human beings who each have an individual mind, and all the worlds interacting in innumerable ways and combinations! However theoretically possible a psychohistorical analysis may be, it is not likely that it can be done in any practical sense."
"What do you mean psychohistorical?"
"I refer to the theoretical assessment of probabilities concerning the future as psychohistory. "
The Emperor rose to his feet suddenly, strode to the other end of the room, turned, strode back, and stopped before the still-sitting Seldon. "Stand up!" he commanded.
Seldon rose and looked up at the somewhat taller Emperor. He strove to keep his gaze steady.
Cleon finally said, "This psychohistory of yours ... if it could be made practical, it would be of great use, would it not?"
"Of enormous use, obviously. To know what the future holds, in even the most general and probabilistic way, would serve as a new and marvelous guide for our actions, one that humanity has never before had. But, of course--" He paused.
"Well?" said Cleon impatiently.
"Well, it would seem that, except for a few decision-makers, the results of psychohistorical analysis would have to remain unknown to the public."
"Unknown!" exclaimed Cleon with surprise.
"Its clear. Let me try to explain. If a psychohistorical analysis is made and the results are then given to the public, the various emotions and reactions of humanity would at once be distorted. The psychohistorical analysis, based on emotions and reactions that take place without knowledge of the future, become meaningless. Do you understand?"
The Emperors eyes brightened and he laughed aloud. "Wonderful!" He clapped his hand on Seldons shoulder and Seldon staggered slightly under the blow.
"Dont you see, man?" said Cleon. "Dont you see? Theres your use. You dont need to predict the future. Just choose a future--a good future, a useful future--and make the kind of prediction that will alter human emotions and reactions in such a way that the future you predicted will be brought about. Better to make a good future than predict a bad one."
Seldon frowned. "I see what you mean, Sire, but that is equally impossible."
"Impossible?"
"Well, at any rate, impractical. Dont you see? If you cant start with human emotions and reactions and predict the future they will bring about, you cant do the reverse either. You cant start with a future and predict the human emotions and reactions that will bring it about."
Cleon looked frustrated. His lips tightened. "And your paper, then? ... Is that what you call it, a paper? ... Of what use is it?"
"It was merely a mathematical demonstration. It made a point of interest to mathematicians, but there was no thought in my mind of its being useful in any way."
"I find that disgusting," said Cleon angrily.
Seldon shrugged slightly. More than ever, he knew he should never have given the paper. What would become of him if the Emperor took it into his head that he had been made to play the fool?
And indeed, Cleon did not look as though he was very far from believing that. "Nevertheless," he said, "what if you were to make predictions of the future, mathematically justified or not; predictions that government officials, human beings whose expertise it is to know what the public is likely to do, will judge to be the kind that will bring about useful reactions?"
"Why would you need me to do that? The government officials could make those predictions themselves and spare the middleman."
"The government officials could not do so as effectively. Government officials do make statements of the sort now and then. They are not necessarily believed."
"Why would I be?"
"You are a mathematician. You would have calculated the future, not ... not intuited it--if that is a word."
"But I would not have done so."
"Who would know that?" Cleon watched him out of narrowed eyes. There was a pause.
Seldon felt trapped. If given a direct order by the Emperor, would it be safe to refuse? If he refused, he might be imprisoned or executed. Not without trial, of course, but it is only with great difficulty that a trial can be made to go against the wishes of a heavy-handed officialdom, particularly one under the command of the Emperor of the vast Galactic Empire. He said finally, "It wouldnt work."
"Why not?"
"If I were asked to predict vague generalities that could not possibly come to pass until long after this generation and, perhaps, the next were dead, we might get away with it, but, on the other hand, the public would pay little attention. They would not care about a glowing eventuality a century or two in the future.
"To attain results," Seldon went on, "I would have to predict matters of sharper consequence, more immediate eventualities. Only to these would the public respond. Sooner or later, though--and probably sooner--one of the eventualities would not come to pass and my usefulness would be ended at once. With that, your popularity might be gone, too, and, worst of all, there would be no further support for the development of psychohistory so that there would be no chance for any good to come of it if future improvements in mathematical insights help to make it move closer to the realm of practicality."
Cleon threw himself into a chair and frowned at Seldon. "Is that all you mathematicians can do? Insist on impossibilities?"
Seldon said with desperate softness, "It is you, Sire, who insist on impossibilities."
"Let me test you, man. Suppose I asked you to use your mathematics to tell me whether I would some day be assassinated? What would you say?"
"My mathematical system would not give an answer to so specific a question, even if psychohistory worked at its best. All the quantum mechanics in the world cannot make it possible to predict the behavior of one lone electron, only the average behavior of many."
"You know your mathematics better than I do. Make an educated guess based on it. Will I someday be assassinated?"
Seldon said softly, "You lay a trap for me, Sire. Either tell me what answer you wish and I will give it to you or else give me free right to make what answer I wish without punishment."
"Speak as you will."
"Your word of honor?"
"Do you want it an writing?" Cleon was sarcastic.
"Your spoken word of honor will be sufficient," said Seldon, his heart sinking, for he was not certain it would be.
"You have my word of honor."
"Then I can tell you that in the past four centuries nearly half the Emperors have been assassinated, from which I conclude that the chances of your assassination are roughly one in two."
"Any fool can give that answer," said Cleon with contempt. "It takes no mathematician."
"Yet I have told you several times that my mathematics is useless for practical problems."
"Cant you even suppose that I learn the lessons that have been given me by my unfortunate predecessors?"
Seldon took a deep breath and plunged in. "No, Sire. All history shows that we do not learn from the lessons of the past. For instance, you have allowed me here in a private audience. What if it were in my mind to assassinate you? Which it isnt, Sire," he added hastily.
Cleon smiled without humor. "My man, you dont take into account our thoroughness--or advances in technology. We have studied your history, your complete record. When you arrived, you were scanned. Your expression and voiceprints were analyzed. We knew your emotional state in detail; we practically knew your thoughts. Had there been the slightest doubt of your harmlessness, you would not have been allowed near me. In fact, you would not now be alive."
A wave of nausea swept through Seldon, but he continued. "Outsiders have always found it difficult to get at Emperors, even with technology less advanced. However, almost every assassination has been a palace coup. It is those nearest the Emperor who are the greatest danger to him. Against that danger, the careful screening of outsiders is irrelevant. And as for your own officials, your own Guardsmen, your own intimates, you cannot treat them as you treat me."
Cleon said, "I know that, too, and at least as well as you do. The answer is that I treat those about me fairly and I give them no cause for resentment."
"A foolish--" began Seldon, who then stopped in confusion.
"Go on," said Cleon angrily. "I have given you permission to speak freely. How am I foolish?"
"The word slipped out, Sire. I meant irrelevant. Your treatment of your intimates is irrelevant. You must be suspicious; it would be inhuman not to be. A careless word, such as the one I used, a careless gesture, a doubtful expression and you must withdraw a bit with narrowed eyes. And any touch of suspicion sets in motion a vicious cycle. The intimate will sense and resent the suspicion and will develop a changed behavior, try as he might to avoid it. You sense that and grow more suspicious and, in the end, either he is executed or you are assassinated. It is a process that has proved unavoidable for the Emperors of the past four centuries and it is but one sign of the increasing difficulty of conducting the affairs of the Empire."
"Then nothing I can do will avoid assassination."
"No, Sire," said Seldon, "but, on the other hand, you may prove fortunate."
Cleons fingers were drumming on the arm of his chair. He said harshly, "You are useless, man, and so is your psychohistory. Leave me." And with those words, the Emperor looked away, suddenly seeming much older than his thirty-two years.
"I have said my mathematics would be useless to you, Sire. My profound apologies." Seldon tried to bow but at some signal he did not see, two guards entered and took him away.
Cleons voice came after him from the royal chamber. "Return that man to the place from which he was brought earlier."

第三章
　　谢顿一点也不相信能见到皇上。在他想来，自己顶多只能跟某个官位四五等、自称代表皇上发言的官员见面。
究竟有多少人见过皇上？亲眼见到，而非透过全息电视？有多少人见过真实的、有血有肉的皇上？这个皇上从不离开皇宫御苑，而他，谢顿，此时正踩在这片土地上。
答案几乎趋近于零。两下五百万个住人世界，每个世界的居民至少十亿——在这数万兆的人口中，有多少人曾经或将会目睹这位活生生的皇帝？一千人？
又有谁会在乎呢？皇帝只不过是帝国的代表，就像“星舰与太阳”国徽一样，却远不及后者那么普遍与真实。如今代表帝国的，是遍布银河各个角落的战士与官吏；是他们变成人民身上的重担，而不是皇帝本人。
因此，当他被引进一间不大不小、装潢豪奢的房间，看见一个年轻人坐在附窗凹室的一张桌角上，一只脚碰着地，另一只脚搁在桌缘摇晃，谢顿不禁纳闷怎么会有这样的官员以这么温和的眼光望着自己。他自己反复地体验过的一个事实，那就是政府官员——尤其是皇下身边当差的——总是显得十分严肃，仿佛将整个银河的重量担在自己肩上。而且似乎越是不重要的官员，表情就越是严肃、越是凶恶。
那么，此人就可能是个官位很高的大官。他真要握的权力有如灿烂的阳光，因而不必利用一脸的阴霾面对问题。
谢顿不知道该表现得多么受宠若惊，但他感到自己最好保持缄默，让对方先开口。
那位官员说：“我相信你就是哈里•谢顿，那个数学家。”
谢顿以最简单的方式答道：“是的，阁下。”便继续等待。
年轻人挥了挥手臂：“应该说‘陛下’才对，不过我痛恨繁文缛节。我总是在繁文缛节里打转，这使我厌烦透顶。现在没旁人在场，所以我要放纵一下，把一切繁文缛节抛到脑后。坐下来，教授。”
对方讲到一半，谢顿便发觉对方正是克里昂大帝一世，这使他感到有点喘不过气来。皇上本人（现在看来）与新闻中经常出现的正式全息肖像有几分相似，不过全息像中的克里昂总是穿得雍容华贵，似乎比本人高大一些、尊贵一点．而且面孔冷漠，毫无表情。
如今他出现在谢顿面前，他的庐山真面目却显得相当平凡。
谢顿一动也不动。
皇上微微皱了皱眉头。他平常颐指气使惯了，此时虽想放弃这种特权，至少是暂时放弃，却仍以专横的口吻说：“喂，我说‘坐下来’。那张椅子，快点。”
谢顿默默坐下，他甚至迨“遵命，陛下”也说不出口。
克里昂微微一笑：“这样好多啦。现在我们可以像两个同胞一样交谈，毕竟，除去一切繁文缛节，我们的关系就是这样。啊。你说是不是？”
谢顿小心翼翼地答道：“假如皇帝陛下喜欢这么说，那一定没错。”
“噢，别这样，你为什么如此小心谨慎？我想要以平等的身份和你交谈，这么做令我高兴，你就顺着我吧。”
“遵命，陛下。”
“只要简单一句‘遵命’就行了，我真没办法令你接受吗？”
克里昂瞪着谢顿，谢顿觉得那双眼睛充满生气与兴味。
最后，皇上总算再度开口：“你看来不像个数学家。”
谢顿终于能露出笑容：“我不知道数学家应该像什么样子，皇帝陛……”
克里昂举起一只手来表示警告，谢顿赶紧把这个尊称咽下去。
克里昂说：“我认为数学家应该满头白发，或许还留着络腮胡，年纪当然有一大把。”
“但即使是数学家，也总有年轻的时候。”
“可是那时他们都默默无闻，等到他们的名声传遍全银河的时候，他们就是我所描述的那种模样。”
“只怕我没什么名气。”
“但你曾在此地举行的会议上演讲。”
“许多人都上了台，有些比我还要年轻，受到注意的却只有少数。”
“你的演讲显然吸引了我一些官员的注意。根据我的了解，你相信预测未来是可能的。”
谢顿突然感到一股倦意。似乎不断有人误解他的理沦，也许他根本不该发表那篇论文。
他说：“其实并不尽然，我得到的结果要狭隘得多。许多系统都会出现一种情形，那就是在某些条件下会产生混沌现象。这就代表说，对于某个特殊的起点，我们不可能预测后来的结果。甚至一些相当简单的系统都是这样，而系统越复杂，就越有可能变得混沌。过去我们一直假定，像人类社会这么复杂的东西，会在很短时间之内变成混沌系统，因此不可预测。然而我做到的则是证明，在研究人类社会时，有可能选择一个起点，并做出一组适当的假设，以便压抑混沌效应，使得预测未来变成可能。当然不是完整的细节，而是大致的趋势；并非绝对确定，只是可以计算其中的几率。”
一直仔细聆听的景帝，这时问道：“可是，这不正意味着你说明了如何预测未来吗？”
“还是那句话，并不尽然。我证明了理论上的可能性，但仅止于此。想要进一步探究，我们必须真正选择一个正确的起点，做出一组正确的假设，然后找出在有限时间内完成计算的方法。在我的数学论证中，完全没提到应该如何进行这些。即使我们全部能做到，顶多也只能估算出几率。这和预测未来并不相同，它只是猜测今后可能发生的事件。每个成功的政治人物、商人，或是从事任何行业的人，都必须能够对未来做出估计，而且估计得相当准，否则他们不会成功。”
“他们并未用到数学。”
“是的，他们凭借的是直觉。”
“只要掌握适当的数学工具，任何人都有办法估算几率，不必非得那些少数具有优异直觉的成功人听不可。”
“说对了，但我只是证明这个数学分析是可能的，并未证明它实际上是可行的。”
“一件事既然可能，又怎会不切实际呢？”
“理论上，我可以去访问银河中每一个世界，和每个世界上的每个人打招呼。然而完成这项工作需要很长的时间，远超过我一生的寿命。即使我能长生不死，新一代出生的速率也大于我访问老一辈的速率。更重要的是，许多老一辈在我来得及访问他们之前便会死去。”
“在你有关未来的数学理论中，也遇到过类似的情况？”
谢顿迟疑了一下，然后继续说：“这个数学计算或许要花太长的时间才能完成，即使我们有一台跟宇宙同样大的计算机，以超空间速度运作也于事无补。在获得任何答案时，岁月早已流逝多年，情势已发生巨大变化，足以使得这个答案变得毫无意义。”
“过程为什么不能简化呢？”克里昂以尖锐的语调问道。
“皇帝陛下，”谢顿感到随着答案越来越不合胃口，皇上的口气变得越来越正式，自己便以更正式的方式响应。“想想科学家处理次原子粒子的方式。那些粒了数量十分庞大，每个都以随机、不可预测的方式运动或振动。但是这个混沌的底层藏有一种秩序，所以我们才能创立量子力学，用以回答所有我们知道该如何问的问题。而在研究社会现象时，我们将人类摆在次原子粒子的地位，不同的是此时还多了一项变因，那就是人类的心灵。粒子以无心的方式运动，人类则不然：若想将心灵中各种态度与冲动考虑在内，会使复杂度增加太多，令我们根本没有时间顾及到各方面。”
“心灵会不会和粒子的无心运动一样，也存在一个底层的秩序呢？”
“或许吧。根据我的数学分析，任何事物之下必定都藏仃秩序，不论表面上看来多么杂乱无章。可是要如何才能找m出这些底层的秩序，它却完全没有提示。想想看——两千五百万个世界，每一个都有整体的特征与文化，每一个都和其他世界大不相同，每一个都至少包含十亿人口，其中每个人拥有一个独立的心灵，而所有这些世界都以数不清的方式与组合在进行互动！不论心理史学分析在理论上多么可能，却难以有什么实际上的应用。”
“你所谓的‘心理史学’是什么意思？”
“我将对未来的理论性几率估算称为心理史学。”
皇上突然起身，大步走向房间另一端，然后一个转身，大步走回来，停在仍坐着的谢顿面前。
“站起来！”他命令道。
谢顿赶紧起立，抬头望着比自己高几厘米的皇帝，勉强让目光保持沉稳。
克里昂终于开口：“你的这个心理史学……假如它能变得实际行，会有很大的用处，是不是？”
“显然会有极大的用处。若能知道未来有些什么，即使是以最概略性、最几率性的方式，也能为我们的行动提供一个崭新的、绝佳的指导，这是人类从来未曾掌握的。可是，当然……”他突然住口。
“怎么样？”克里昂不耐烦地问。
“嗯，情况似乎是这样的，除了少数决策者之外，心理史学分析的结果必须对大众保密。”
“保密！”克里昂高声惊叫。
“这很明显，让我试着解释一下。假如我们完成一个心理史学分析。并将结果公之于世，人类的各种情绪与反应必将立刻受到扭曲。这样一来，心理史学分析就会变得毫无意史．因为它根据的是在对未来不知情的情况下，众人所产生的情绪与反应。您了解我的话吗？”
皇上突然眼睛一亮，哈哈大笑几声：“太好了！”
他伸手拍了拍谢顿的肩膀，令谢顿的身子轻轻晃了一下。
“你这个人，你看不出来吗？”克里昂说，“难道你看不出来吗？这就是你的用处。你根本不需要预测未来，只要选择一个未来——一个好的未来、一个有用的未来。然后做出一种预测，让所有人类的情绪和反应发生变化，以便实现你预测的那个未来。与其预测一个坏的未来，不知制造一个好的未来。”
谢顿皱起眉头：“我懂得您的意思，陛下，但这同样是不可能的事。”
“不可能？”
“嗯．至少是不切实际。您看不出来吗？如果我们不能从人类的情绪和反应出发，不能预测这些因素将导致的未来，那么同样无法反其道而行之。我们不能从一个选定的未来出发，再预测会导致这个结果的人类情绪和反应。”
克里昂显得相当沮丧，紧紧抿着嘴唇。“那么，你的论文呢？……你是不是管它叫论文？……它又有什么用呢？”
“那只是个数学论证。它提出一个令数学家感兴趣的结论，但我从未想到会有任何实际用途。”
“我发觉这实在可恶。”克里昂气呼呼地说。
谢顿微微耸了耸肩，他现在更加确定，自己根本不该发表那篇论文。假如皇上产生一个念头，认为他成了别人愚弄的对象，自己会有什么样的下场呢？
事实上，克里昂看来像是快要有这样的念头了。
“不过话说回来，”他说，“假如你对未来做出一些预测，不论是否在数学上站得住脚，但根据那些了解大众趋向的政府官员判断，它们就是会带来有用反应的预测。你认为如何？”
“您为何需要由我做这件事？政府官员自己就能做这些预测，根本不必假手中间人。”
“政府官员来做不会那么有效。他们偶尔的确会发表一些这类声明，可是民众不一定相信他们。”
“为什么会相信我？”
“你是个数学家，你会计算出未来的趋向，而不是……不是凭直觉——如果可以这样说的话。”
“可是我并没有。”
“谁会知道呢？”克里昂眯起眼睛望着他。
接下来是短暂的沉默。谢顿感到自己中计了，如果皇上直接对他下令，他能拒绝吗？若是拒绝的话，他或许将遭到监禁或处决。当然不会没有审判，可是面对一个专制的官僚体制，尤其是银河大帝国的皇帝指挥之下的极权官僚体制。想要获得公平市判是难上加难的一什事。
最后，他终于答道：“这样行不通。”
“为什么？”
“如果要我做出一些含糊的一般性预测，它必须等到我们这一代，甚至下一代死后多年才有可能实现，那么我们也许可以蒙混过去。可是，反之，民众同样不会在意。对于一两个世纪之后才会发生的重大事件，他们是不可能关心的。”
“为了获得成果，”谢顿继续说，“我必须预测一些结果较为明确的事件，一些近在眼前的变故，只有这种预测才能获得大众的回应。不过迟早——也许不会迟只会早——其中一项预测不会实现，我的利用价值将立刻结束。这样一来，您的声望也将随之消失。更糟的是，以后再也不会有人支持心理史学的发展，即使未来的数学进展能将它改良到接近实用的程度，它也不会再有大显身手的机会。”
克里昂猛然坐下，对着谢顿皱起眉头。“你们数学家能做的就是这个吗？坚持各种的不可能？”
谢顿极力以和缓的语调说：“是您，陛下，一直在坚持一些不可能的事。”
“你这个人，让我来测验你一下。假如我要你利用你的数学告诉我，是否有朝一日我会遭到行刺，你怎么说？”
“即使将心理史学发挥到极致，我的数学体系仍无法回答如此特定的问题。全世界的量子力学都不可能预测单独一个电子的踪迹，唯一能预测的只是众多电子的平均行为。”
“你比我更了解自己的数学理论，就根据它做个合理的猜测吧。我是否有朝一日会遭到行刺？”
谢顿柔声答道：“您这是在对我设下圈套，陛下。干脆告诉我，您想要听什么答案，我就把这个答案说出来，否则授权给我，让我向南回答而不至招罪。”
“你尽管说吧。”
“您以荣誉相保？”
“你要我立下字据吗？”克里昂语带讥讽地说。
“您口头的荣誉担保就够了。”谢顿的心住往下沉，因为他不确定会有什么结果。
“我以荣誉担保。”
“那么我可以告诉您，在过去四个世纪中，几乎有一半的皇帝遭到行刺，根据这一点，我推断您遭到行刺的机会约是二分之一。”
“任何傻瓜都能说出这个答案，”克里昂以轻蔑的口吻说，“根本不需要数学家。”
“可是我跟您说过好几次了，我的数学理论对实际问题毫无用处。”
“难道你就不能假设，我从那些不幸的先帝身上吸取了教训？”
谢顿深深吸了一口气，一鼓作气说道：“不能，陛下，历史在显示我们无法从历史中吸取任何教训。举例而言，您准许我在这里单独觐见，假如我有心行刺呢？事实上，当然没有，陛下。”他赶紧补充一句。
克里昂冷冷一笑：“你这个人，你没有考虑到我们的科技多么完善，或者说多么先进。我们研究过你的背景、你的完整履历。在你抵达之后，你就接受了扫描，你的形容和声纹都经过分析。我们知道你的详尽情绪状态，几乎可说我们知道你的思想。如果对你的忠贞有丝毫怀疑，绝对不会允许你接近我。事实上，果真如此的话，你根本活不到现在。”
谢顿感到一阵晕眩，不过他继续说：“即使没有那么先进的科技，外人也总是难以接近任何一位皇帝。然而，几乎每次行刺都是宫廷政变，对皇帝构成最大威胁的就是最接近皇帝的人。想要趋吉避凶，细查外人其实无济于事。至于您自己的官员、您自己的禁卫军、您自己的亲信，您总不能以对待我的方式对待他们。”
克里昂说：“这点我也知道，至少和你一样清楚。我的回答是，我对身边的每个人都很好，让他们没有怨恨我的理由。”
“愚蠢……”谢顿话才出口便突然闭嘴，显得十分狼狈。
“继续，”克里昂怒冲冲地说，“我已经准许你自由发表意见。你说，我是怎么个蠢法？”
“我说溜了嘴，陛下。我原本想说的是‘无关’，这与您如何对待您的亲信根本无关。您一定会疑神疑鬼，否则就不符合人性。一个不经意的字眼——例如我刚才的表现、一个不经意的动作、一个可疑的表情，都必定会令您提高警觉，而收回一点信任。任何的猜疑都将造成恶性循环，那位亲信感觉得到，他会恼恨您的疑心，并会改变他的言行举止，尽可能避免让您再度起疑。您也会察觉这个变化，因而疑心越来越莺，到头来不是他被处决，就是您遭到行刺。过去四个世纪的列位皇帝，全都无法避免这样的过程。帝国事务变得越来越难以处理，这只是其中的征兆之一。”
“那么，我无论如何也无法避免遭到行刺喽？”
“是的，陛下。”讲顿说，“不过，反之，您也可能属于幸运的那一半。”
克里昂用手指轮流敲打座椅扶手，然后厉声说道：“你这个人，你根本没用，你的心理史学也一样。给我走吧。”说完这几句话之后，皇上将头转了开去，突然间好像比三十二岁的实际年龄老了许多。
“我早就说过，我的数学理论对您没用，陛下。我致上最深的歉意。”
谢顿本来准备鞠躬，但两名卫士不知如何接到讯号，及时走进来将他拉开。御书房中还传出克里昂的一句：“这个人从哪里带来，就把他送回哪里去。”
Chapter 4

Eto Demerzel emerged and glanced at the Emperor with a hint of proper deference. He said, "Sire, you have almost lost your temper."
Cleon looked up and, with an obvious effort, managed to smile. "Well, so I did. The man was very disappointing."
"And yet he promised no more than he offered."
"He offered nothing."
"And promised nothing, Sire."
"It was disappointing."
Demerzel said, "More than disappointing, perhaps. The man is a loose cannon, Sire."
"A loose what, Demerzel? You are always so full of strange expressions. What is a cannon?"
Demerzel said gravely, "It is simply an expression I heard in my youth, Sire. The Empire is full of strange expressions and some are unknown on Trantor, as those of Trantor are sometimes unknown elsewhere."
"Do you come to teach me the Empire is large? What do you mean by saying that the man is a loose cannon?"
"Only that he can do much harm without necessarily intending it. He does not know his own strength. Or importance."
"You deduce that, do you, Demerzel?"
"Yes, Sire. He is a provincial. He does not know Trantor or its ways. He has never been on our planet before and he cannot behave like a man of breeding, like a courtier. Yet he stood up to--"
"And why not? I gave him permission to speak. I left off ceremony. I treated him as an equal."
"Not entirely, Sire. You dont have it within you to treat others as equals. You have the habit of command. And even if you tried to put a person at his ease, there would be few who could manage it. Most would be speechless or, worse, subservient and sycophantic. This man stood up to you."
"Well, you may admire that, Demerzel, but I didnt like him." Cleon looked thoughtfully discontented. "Did you notice that he made no effort to explain his mathematics to me? It was as though he knew I would not understand a word of it."
"Nor would you have, Sire. You are not a mathematician, nor a scientist of any kind, nor an artist. There are many fields of knowledge in which others know more than you. It is their task to use their knowledge to serve you. You are the Emperor, which is worth all their specializations put together."
"Is it? I would not mind being made to feel ignorant by an old man who had accumulated knowledge over many years. But this man, Seldon, is just my age. How does he know so much?"
"He has not had to learn the habit of command, the art of reaching a decision that will affect the lives of others."
"Sometimes, Demerzel, I wonder if you are laughing at me."
"Sire?" said Demerzel reproachfully.
"But never mind. Back to that loose cannon of yours. Why should you consider him dangerous? He seems a naive provincial to me."
"He is. But he has this mathematical development of his."
"He says it is useless."
"You thought it might be useful. I thought so, after you had explained it to me. Others might. The mathematician may come to think so himself, now that his mind has been focused on it. And who knows, he may yet work out some way of making use of it. If he does, then to foretell the future, however mistily, is to be in a position of great power. Even if he does not wish power for himself, a kind of self-denial that always seems to me to be unlikely, he might be used by others."
"I tried to use him. He would not."
"He had not given it thought. Perhaps now he will. And if he was not interested in being used by you, might he not be persuaded by--let us say--the Mayor of Wye?"
"Why should he be willing to help Wye and not us?"
"As he explained, it is hard to predict the emotions and behavior of individuals."
Cleon scowled and sat in thought. "Do you really think he might develop this psychohistory of his to the point where it is truly useful? He is so certain he cannot."
"He may, with time, decide he was wrong in denying the possibility."
Cleon said, "Then I suppose I ought to have kept him."
Demerzel said, "No, Sire. Your instinct was correct when you let him go. Imprisonment, however disguised, would cause resentment and despair, which would not help him either to develop his ideas further or make him eager to help us. Better to let him go as you have done, but to keep him forever on an invisible leash. In this way, we can see that he is not used by an enemy of yourself, Sire, and we can see that when the time comes and he has fully developed his science, we can pull on our leash and bring him in. Then we could be ... more persuasive."
"But what if he it picked up by an enemy of mine or, better, of the Empire, for I am the Empire after all, or if, of his own accord, he wishes to serve an enemy--I dont consider that out of the question, you see."
"Nor should you. I will see to it that this doesnt happen, but if, against all striving, it does happen, it would be better if no one has him than if the wrong person does."
Cleon looked uneasy. "Ill leave that all in your hands, Demerzel, but I hope were not too hasty. He could be, after all, nothing but the purveyor of a theoretical science that does not and cannot work."
"Quite possibly, Sire, but it would be safer to assume the man is--or might be--important. We lose only a little time and nothing more if we find that we have concerned ourselves with a nonentity. We may lose a Galaxy if we find we have ignored someone of great importance."
"Very well, then," said Cleon, "but I trust I wont have to know the details--if they prove unpleasant."
Demerzel said, "Let us hope that will not be the case."
第四章
　　伊图•丹莫茨尔出现在皇上面前，以适度尊崇的眼神瞥了皇上一眼：“陛下，您差点就发脾气了。”
克里昂抬起头来，挤出一个显然是很勉强的微笑：“嗯，没错，那人实在令我非常失望。”
“但他并未做出能力范围之外的承诺。”
“他一点能力也没有。”
“也没有做任何承诺，陛下。”
“真令人失望。”
丹莫茨尔说：“或许不只令人失望而已。这人是一颗流失的炮弹，陛下。”
“一颗流失的什么，丹莫茨尔？你总喜欢用许多古怪的词句。炮弹是什么？”
丹莫茨尔以严肃的口吻说：“这不过是我年轻时听到的一种说法，陛下。帝国之中充满古怪的词句，有些是川陀从未听说过的，就好像有些川陀的惯用语，其他地方的人根本听不懂一样。”
“你是来提醒我帝国的疆域辽阔？你说那人是一颗流失的炮弹，这到底是什么意思？”
“只是指他可能犯下无心之失，因而造成重大伤害。他不知道自己的力量，或者说重要性。”
“你推论出来的，是吗，丹莫茨尔？”
“是的，陛下。他是个乡下人，并不了解川陀以及川陀的规矩。过去他从未到过我们的行星，无法表现得像个有教养的人，比如说像个廷臣，但是他竟然敢跟您顶嘴。”
“有何不可？我准许他有话直说。我取消了繁文缛节，以平等的方式待他。”
“并不尽然，陛下。您天生就无法平等对待他人，您习惯于发号施令。即使您试图让对方放松心情，也很少有人能做到这一点。大多数人会变得哑口无言，更糟的表现则是奉承、阿谀，而那人却跟您顶嘴。”
“嗯，你可以认为这点很了不起，丹莫茨尔，可是我不喜欢他。”克里昂看来内心十分不满，“你注意到了吗？他根本没有试着对我解释他的数学理论，好像他知道我一个字也听不懂。”
“您的确听不懂，陛下。您不是数学家，不是任何一类的科学家，也不是一位艺术家。在许许多多的知识领域中，都有人比您懂得还多，他们的职责就是利用这些知识为您服务。您的身份是皇帝，这点就不亚于他们所有专长的总和。”
“是吗？如果是个花了许多年月累积知识的老头，令我感到自己对某方面一窍不通，那我倒也不在意。可是这个人，谢顿，只不过跟我同年。他怎么会知道那么多？”
“他不必学习领袖气质，不必学习如何做出左右他人生死的决策。”
“有些时候，丹莫茨尔，我会怀疑你是否在讥笑我。”
“陛下？”丹莫茨尔以责难的口气说。
“不过算了吧，回到你刚才说的那个流失的炮弹。你为何认为他是危险人物？在我看来，他似乎是个纯真的乡下人。”
“没错，可是他拥有那套数学理论。”
“他说那根本没用。”
“您本来认为它也许有用，在您向我解释之后，我也是这么想，所以其他人也可能抱同样看法。既然这位数学家已将心思集中在这个问题上，他自己的想法或许也会改变。谁知道呢。他也许会研究出利用这套数学的方法。假如他成功了，有办法预测未来，不论是多么朦胧模糊，也等于掌握了极大的权力。即使他自己不希望拥有权力——我总认为如此自制的人少之又少，他也可能会被别人利用。”
“我试图利用他，可是他不肯。”
“他没好好考虑，也许现在他就会愿意。假如他不喜欢被您利用，难道就不可能被——比方说——卫荷区长说服吗？”
“他为什么会愿意帮助卫荷区长，而不愿帮我们？”
“正如他刚才的解释，个体的情绪与行为是很难预测的。”
克里昂面露不悦之色，坐在那里沉思良久。“你真的认为，他有可能将他的心理史学发展到真正有用的地步？他十分肯定做不到这一点。”
“若干时日之后，他或许会认为否认这个可能性是个错误。”
克里昂说：“这么说，我想我该把他留下来。”
丹奠获尔说：“不，陛下，当您让他离去时，您的直觉完全正确。若是将他囚禁起来，不论做得如何不着痕迹，也将引起他的愤恨和绝望。这样不但无助于他进一步发展他的理论，也无法使他心甘情愿为我们服务。最好还是放他走，像您所做的那样，但是永远用一条隐形的绳索将他拴住。这样一来，我们就能确定他不至于被陛下您的敌人利用，也可以确定等到时机成熟、他将这个科学理论发展完备时，我们便能收回那条绳索，再把他拉进宫来。到那个时候，我们就可以……态度强硬一点。”
“可是，万一他被我的敌人抓走——或者该说帝国的敌人，因为毕竟我就等于这个帝国，或是如果他自愿为敌人服务呢？我不认为这点绝无可能，你了解吧。”
“您的顾虑没有错。我会确保不至于发生这种事，但若是尽了最大努力，却仍出现这种情形，与其让不当的人拥有他，倒不如让谁都得不到。”
克里昂显得相当不安：“我将这件事完全交到你的手上，丹莫茨尔，但我希望我们不要操之过急。无论如何，他有可能只是个理论科学的买办，根本没什么真正的用处。”
“很有可能，陛下。不过为了安全起见，最好还是假没此人很重要，或者说也许很重要。假使到头来我们发现，只是在为一个无足轻重的角色伤脑筋，我们不过浪费了一点时间，除此之外不会有其他损失。但是如果我们最后发现，忽略的是个再重要不过的人物，那我们将会丢掉整个银河。”
“这样很好，”克里昂说，“但我确信我不必知道细节，若是细节果真令人不愉快的话。”　丹莫茨尔说：“让我们期望结果不会是那样。”
Chapter 5

Seldon had     an evening, a night, and part of a morning to get over his meeting with the Emperor. At least, the changing quality of light within the walkways, moving corridors, squares, and parks of the Imperial Sector of Trantor made it seem that an evening, a night, and part of a morning had passed. He sat now in a small park on a small plastic seat that molded itself neatly to his body and he was comfortable. Judging from the light, it seemed to be midmorning and the air was just cool enough to seem fresh without possessing even the smallest bite.
Was it like this all the time? He thought of the gray day outside when he went to see the Emperor. And he thought of all the gray days and cold days and hot days and rainy days and snowy days on Helicon, his home, and he wondered if one could miss them. Was it possible to sit in a park on Trantor, having ideal weather day after day, so that it felt as though you were surrounded by nothing at all--and coming to miss a howling wind or a biting cold or a breathless humidity?
Perhaps. But not on the first day or the second or the seventh. He would have only this one day and he would leave tomorrow. He meant to enjoy it while he could. He might, after all, never return to Trantor. Still, he continued to feel uneasy at having spoken as independently as he had to a man who could, at will, order ones imprisonment or execution--or, at the very least, the economic and social death of loss of position and status. Before going to bed, Seldon had looked up Cleon I in the encyclopedic portion of his hotel room computer. The Emperor had been highly praised as, no doubt,     all Emperors in their own lifetime, regardless of their deeds. Seldon had dismissed that, but he was interested in the fact that Cleon had been born in the Palace and had never left its grounds. He had never been in Trantor itself, in any part of the multi-domed world. It was a matter of security, perhaps, but what it meant was that the Emperor was in prison, whether he admitted the matter to himself or not. It might be the most luxurious prison in the Galaxy, but it was a prison just the same.
And though the Emperor had seemed mild-mannered and had shown no sign of being a bloody-minded autocrat as so many of his predecessors had been, it was not good to have attracted his attention. Seldon welcomed the thought of leaving tomorrow for Helicon, even though it would be winter (and a rather nasty one, so far) back home.
He looked up at the bright diffuse light. Although it could never rain in here, the atmosphere was far from dry. A fountain played not far from him; the plants were green and had probably never felt drought. Occasionally, the shrubbery rustled as though a small animal or two was hidden there. He heard the hum of bees.
Really, though Trantor was spoken of throughout the Galaxy as an artificial world of metal and ceramic, in this small patch it felt positively rustic. There were a few other persons taking advantage of the park all wearing light hats, some quite small. There was one rather pretty young woman not far away, but she was bent over a viewer and he could not see her face clearly. A man walked past, looked at him briefly and incuriously, then sat down in a seat facing him and buried himself in a sheaf of teleprints, crossing one leg, in its tight pink trouser leg, over the other.
There was a tendency to pastel shades among the men, oddly enough, while the women mostly wore white. Being a clean environment, it made sense to wear light colors. He looked down in amusement at his own Heliconian costume, which was predominantly dull brown. If he were to stay on Trantor as he was not he would need to purchase suitable clothing or he would become an object of curiosity or laughter or repulsion. The man with the teleprints had, for instance, looked up at him more curiously this time--no doubt intrigued by his Outworldish clothing. Seldon was relieved that he did not smile. He could be philosophical over being a figure of fun, but, surely, he could not be expected to enjoy it. Seldon watched the man rather unobtrusively, for he seemed to be engaged in some sort of internal debate. At the moment he looked as if he was about to speak, then seemed to think better of it, then seemed to wish to speak again. Seldon wondered what the outcome would be.
He studied the man. He was tall, with broad shoulders and no sign of a paunch, darkish hair with a glint of blond, smooth-shaven, a grave expression, an air of strength though there were no bulging muscles, a face that was a touch rugged--pleasant, but with nothing "pretty" about it. By the time the man had lost the internal fight with himself (or won, perhaps) and leaned toward him, Seldon had decided he liked him. The man said, "Pardon me, werent you at the Decennial Convention? Mathematics?"
"Yes, I was," said Seldon agreeably.
"Ah, I thought I saw you there. It was--excuse me--that moment of recognition that led me to sit here. If I am intruding on your privacy--"
"Not at all. Im just enjoying an idle moment."
"Lets see how close I can get. Youre Professor Seldon."
"Seldon. Hari Seldon. Quite close. And you?"
"Chetter Hummin." The man seemed slightly embarrassed. "Rather a homespun name, Im afraid."
"Ive never come across any Chetters before," said Seldon. "Or Hummins. So that makes you somewhat unique, I should think. It might be viewed as being better than being mixed up with all the countless Haris there are. Or Seldons, for that matter."
Seldon moved his chair closer to Hummin, scraping it against the slightly elastic ceramoid tiles.
"Talk about homespun," he said, "What about this Outworldish clothing Im wearing? It never occurred to me that I ought to get Trantorian garb."
"You could buy some," said Hummin, eyeing Seldon with suppressed disapproval.
"Ill be leaving tomorrow and, besides, I couldnt afford it. Mathematicians deal with large numbers sometimes, but never in their income.--I presume youre a mathematician, Hummin."
"No. Zero talent there."
"Oh." Seldon was disappointed. "You said you saw me at the Decennial Convention."
"I was there as an onlooker. Im a journalist." He waved his teleprints, seemed suddenly aware that he was holding them and shoved them into his jacket pouch. "I supply the material for the news holocasts." Then, thoughtfully, "Actually, Im rather tired of it."
"The job?"
Hummin nodded. "Im sick of gathering together all the nonsense from every world. I hate the downward spiral."
He glanced speculatively at Seldon. "Sometimes something interesting turns up, though. Ive heard you were seen in the company of an Imperial Guard and making for the Palace gate. You werent by any chance seen by the Emperor, were you?" The smile vanished from Seldons face. He said slowly, "If I was, it would scarcely be something I could talk about for publication."
"No, no, not for publication. If you dont know this, Seldon, let me be the first to tell you--The first rule of the news game is that nothing is ever said about the Emperor or his personal entourage except what is officially given out. Its a mistake, of course, because rumors fly that are much worse than the truth, but thats the way it is."
"But if you cant report it, friend, why do you ask?"
"Private curiosity. Believe me, in my job I know a great deal more than ever gets on the air.--Let me guess. I didnt follow your paper, but I gathered that you were talking about the possibility of predicting the future."
Seldon shook his head and muttered, "It was a mistake."
"Pardon me?"
"Nothing."
"Well, prediction--accurate prediction--would interest the Emperor, or any man in government, so Im guessing that Cleon, First of that Name, asked you about it and wouldnt you please give him a few predictions."
Seldon said stiffly, "I dont intend to discuss the matter."
Hummin shrugged slightly. "Eto Demerzel was there, I suppose."
"Who?"
"Youve never heard of Eto Demerzel?"
"Never."
"Cleons alter ego--Cleons brain--Cleons evil spirit. Hes been called all those things--if we confine ourselves to the nonvituperative. He must have been there."
Seldon looked confused and Hummin said, "Well, you may not have seen him, but he was there. And if he thinks you can predict the future--"
"I cant predict the future," said Seldon, shaking his head vigorously. "If you listened to my paper, youll know that I only spoke of a theoretical possibility."
"Just the same, if he thinks you can predict the future, he will not let you go."
"He must have. Here I am."
"That means nothing. He knows where you are and hell continue to know. And when he wants you, hell get you, wherever you are. And if he decides youre useful, hell squeeze the use out of you. And if he decides youre dangerous, hell squeeze the life out of you."
Seldon stared. "What are you trying to do. Frighten me?"
"Im trying to warn you."
"I dont believe what youre saying."
"Dont you? A while ago you said something was a mistake. Were you thinking that presenting the paper was a mistake and that it was getting you into the kind of trouble you dont want to be in?"
Seldon bit his lower lip uneasily. That was a guess that came entirely too close to the truth--and it was at this moment that Seldon felt the presence of intruders.
They did not cast a shadow, for the light was too soft and widespread. It was simply a movement that caught the corner of his eye--and then it stopped.
Flight
TRANTOR-- ... The capital of the First Galactic Empire ... Under Cleon I, it had its "twilight glow." To all appearances, it was then at its peak. Its land surface of 200 million square kilometers was entirely domed (except for the Imperial Palace area) and underlaid with an endless city that extended beneath the continental shelves. The population was 40 billion and although the signs were plentiful (and clearly visible in hindsight) that there were gathering problems, those who lived on Trantor undoubtedly found it still the Eternal World of legend and did not expect it would ever ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第五章
　　经过了一个黄昏、整个夜晚，以及半个上午的时光，谢顿慢慢从与皇上会面的情绪中恢复过来；至少，川陀皇区中人行道、活动回廊、广场与公园的光线明暗变化，使人觉得已过了一个黄昏、整个夜晚，以及第二天的半个上午。
此刻，他坐在一个小公园的一张小型塑料椅上，椅子的形状曲线与他的身体刚好吻合，他感到非常舒服。根据光线判断，上午似乎刚过一半，空气的凉爽程度适中，刚好使人感到清新，却一点没有寒冷的意思。
气候是否总是这样？他想到了去见皇上时遇到的那种灰暗天气。然后，他又想起故乡赫利肯的阴天、冷天、热天、雨天，以及下雪天……有谁会怀念那种天气吗？如果坐在川陀的一座公园里，日复一日都是理想的天气，有没有可能使人觉得周遭太过平淡无奇，从而怀念起怒吼的狂风、刺骨的寒冷，或是令人窒息的湿气？
或许会吧，但绝不会是在第一天、第二天，甚至第七天。而他只剩下今天最后一天，明天便将离开此地。他打定主意乘机享受一番，毕竟，自己可能再也不会重返川陀。
然而他仍旧感到惴惴不安，始终无法忘怀曾与一个能随意下令监禁或处决任何人的人（至少能剥夺他人的社会地位，造成一种经济性、社会性的死亡）以那种单独的方式做过一次晤谈。
就寝之前，谢顿利用旅馆房间内的计算机，从电子百科全书中查到了克里昂一世的资料。内容照例为这位皇帝歌功颂德一番，像所有皇帝生前所受到的歌颂一样，这与他们的政绩毫无关系。谢顿略过那些内容，他感兴趣的是发现克里昂生于皇宫，一生从未离开御苑。他从来没有到过真正的川陀——这个覆盖着多面穹顶的世界。也许这是基于安全的考虑．但它代表的是这位皇帝一直遭到囚禁，不论他自已是否承认这一点。那可能是全银河最豪华的一座牢狱，但却无法改变牢狱的事实。
纵使皇上的态度相当温和，一点也不像历代多位嗜血的独裁暴君，但引起他的注意总不是好事。谢顿很高兴明天就要回赫利肯，虽然家乡如今正值冬季（而且是个酷寒的冬季，日前他仍这么认为）。
他抬头望了望漫射的明亮光线。虽然此地永远不会下雨，大气却绝对不算干燥。离他不远的地方有座喷泉；植物是绿油油的一片，或许从来末曾尝过干旱的滋味。灌木丛偶尔会沙沙作响，好像有一两只小动物躲在里面。此外，他还听到蜜蜂的嗡嗡声。
真的，虽然整个银河都说川陀是个金属与陶质建成的人工世界，但在这小小的范围内，却令人有置身田园的感觉。
附近有些人也在享受这座公园，他们都戴着轻便的帽子，其中有些相当小。不远处有个挺漂亮的年轻女子，不过她正弯腰凑向一具观景器，他无法看清她的脸庞。此时有一名男子经过，对他不经意地望了一眼，然后在他对面的椅子上坐下来，将头埋进一束电讯报表中。那人还跷起二郎腿，谢顿注意到他穿着一条粉红色紧身裤。
真奇怪，此地男士的衣着有较为花哨的倾向。而大多数女子则身穿白色衣裳。由于环境清洁干净，穿着淡色服装是很合理的事。他低下头来，看了看自己的赫利肯服饰，主要的色系是沉闷的褐色，令他感到有些可笑。假如他要留在川陀——事实不然，就得购买一些适当的衣物，否则必将招来好奇的眼光，或是成为嘲笑或排斥的对象。比方说，那个拿着电讯报表的男子，这回便以比较好奇的眼光抬头望着他，无疑是被他的外星服饰所吸引。
谢顿庆幸对方并未露出笑容。他对成为笑柄虽可以处之泰然，不过，当然，他绝不会喜欢这种情况。
谢顿以相当谨慎的态度望着这个男子，因为对方内心似乎在进行一场激战。他原本看来准备开口，然后好像改变了主意，接下来仿佛又回到原先的决定。谢顿很想知道最后的结果究竟如何。
他仔细打量这名男子。此人的个子很高，肩膀宽阔，看不出有凸出的小腹，头发是浅黑色，其中掺有一束金发，胡子刮得干净，一脸严肃的表情，看起来孔武有力，不过没有盘虬的肌肉，脸庞显得有几分棱角——十分顺眼，但绝对称不上好看。
等到那名男子的内心交战失败了（或者是胜利了），将身体倾向谢顿的时候，谢顿认定自己对他已有好感。
那人开口道：“对不起，你是不是曾经出席十年会议？数学十年会议？”
“是的，我参加了。”谢顿欣然答道。
“啊，我想我在会场见过你。就是因为——对不起，刚才我认出你来，所以才会坐到这里。如果我侵犯了你的隐私……”
“一点也没有。我正在享受片刻的悠闲时光。”
“让我看看还记得多少，你是谢东教授。”
“谢顿，哈里•谢顿，相当接近了。你呢？”
“契特•夫铭，”那人似乎有点尴尬，“只怕是个相当普通的名字。”
“我从没碰见过叫契特的人，”谢顿说，“或者是姓夫铭的，所以我该认为你相当特别。也许可以这样说，这总比跟数不清的哈里，或是无数的谢顿纠缠不清要好得多。”
谢顿将他的椅子挪近夫铭，椅子在带点弹性的陶砖上摩擦出嘎嘎声。
“谈到普通，”他说，“我这身外星服装怎么样？我压根没想到该弄一套川陀衣饰。”
“你可以去买些。”夫铭说，同时以不大赞同的目光打量谢顿。
“我明天就要离开此地，而且我也买不起。数学家有时会处理一些大数目，但绝不是他们的收入——我猜你也是个数学家，夫铭。”
“不是，这方面我毫无天分。”
“哦，”谢顿感到有些失望，“你刚才说曾在十年会议中见到我。”
“我在那里只是个旁观者，我的职业是新闻记者。”他挥了挥电讯报表，似乎这才发觉一直还拿在手中，立刻将它塞进外衣口袋。“我为全讯新闻提供消息。”然后，他以意味深长的语气说，“其实，我已经相当厌烦。”
“你的工作？”
夫铭点了点头：“从各个世界收集各种毫无意义的消息，这种差事令我倒胃口，我恨透了每况愈下的世风。”
他若有所思地瞥了谢顿一眼：“不过，有时还是会发生些有趣的事。我听说有人看到你和一名禁卫军在一起，朝皇宫大门的方向走去。你该不会是被皇上召见吧，有吗？”
谢顿脸上的笑容顿时消失无踪，他缓缓说道：“即使有的话，也不是我能对新闻界发表的事。”
“不，不，不是为了发表。如果你不知道这种事，谢顿，让我告诉你——跑新闻的第一条游戏规则，就是有关皇上或皇上身边亲信的消息，除了官方发布的之外，其他一律不能报道。当然，这样是不对的，因为谣言满天飞比公布真相还要糟得多，可是规则就是这样。”
“如果不能报道，朋友，你为什么还要问呢？”
“私下的好奇心。相信我，干我这一行的，知道的比公之于世的消息要多得多——让我猜猜看，我没能听懂你的论文内容，但我推测你谈论的是预测未来的可能性。”
谢顿摇了摇头，喃喃说道：“那是个错误。”
“你说什么？”
“没什么。”
“嗯，预测——正确的预测，会令皇上或任何一名政府官员感兴趣。所以我猜克里昂一世向你问及这档事，还有你愿不愿意帮他做些预测。”
谢顿以僵硬的语调说：“我不想谈论这件事。”
夫铭轻轻耸了耸肩：“伊图•丹莫茨尔也在场吧，我想。”
“谁？”
“你没听说过伊图•丹莫茨尔？”
“从来没有。”
“克里昂的第二自我、克里昂的大脑、克里昂的邪灵——这些都是人们对他的称呼，还不包括那些辱骂性的绰号。他当时也一定在场。”
谢顿露出困惑的表情，夫铭继续说：“嗯，你也许没看到他，可是他绝对在场。假如他认为你能预测末来……”
“我无法预测未来。”谢顿一面说，一面使劲摇着头。“如果你听过我发表的论文，就会知道我谈论的只是理论上的可能性。”
“那没什么不同，假如他认定你能预测未来，他就不会让你走。”
“他当然会，现在我不就在这里。”
“这点毫无意义，他知道你在哪里，今后也将继续掌握你的行踪。当他想要你的时候，他就能找到你，不论你在天涯海角。要是他认为你有用处，必定会把你的用处榨干；要是他认为你有危险，就会把你的命榨出来。”
谢顿瞪着对方：“你想吓唬我？”
“我是试图警告你。”
“我不相信你说的这番话。”
“不相信？刚刚你还提到某件事是个错误。你是不是认为发表那篇论文是个错误，因为它给你带来一种避之唯恐不及的麻烦？”
谢顿不安地咬着下唇，这个猜测与实情简直太吻合了。与此同时，谢顿突然发觉有外人走近。
由于光线过度柔和与分散，来人并未投射出仟何阴影。只是他的眼角捕捉到一个动作，动作瞬时停住。
Chapter 6
Seldon looked up. A young man was standing before him, looking down at him with an expression of amused contempt. Next to him was another young man--a bit younger, perhaps. Both were large and appeared to be strong. They were dressed in an extreme of Trantorian fashion, Seldon judged--boldly clashing colors, broad fringed belts, round hats with wide brims all about and the two ends of a bright pink ribbon extending from the brim to the back of the neck.
In Seldons eyes, it was amusing and he smiled.
The young man before him snapped, "Whatre you grinning at, misfit?" Seldon ignored the manner of address and said gently, "Please pardon my smile. I was merely enjoying your costume."
"My costume? So? And what are you wearing? Whats that awful offal you call clothes?" His hand went out and his finger flicked at the lapel of Seldons jacket--disgracefully heavy and dull, Seldon himself thought, in comparison to the others lighthearted colors.
Seldon said, "Im afraid its my Outworlder clothes. Theyre all I have." He couldnt help notice that the few others who were sitting in the small park were rising to their feet and walking off. It was as though they were expecting trouble and had no desire to remain in the vicinity. Seldon wondered if his new friend, Hummin, was leaving too, but he felt it injudicious to take his eyes away from the young man who was confronting him. He teetered back on his chair slightly.
The young man said, "You an Outworlder?"
"Thats right. Hence my clothes."
"Hence? What kind of words that? Outworld word?"
"What I meant was, that was why my clothes seem peculiar to you. Im a visitor here."
"From what planet?"
"Helicon."
The young mans eyebrows drew together. "Never heard of it."
"Its not a large planet."
"Why dont you go back there?"
"I intend to. Im leaving tomorrow."
"Sooner! Now!"
The young man looked at his partner. Seldon followed the look and caught a glimpse of Hummin. He had not left, but the park was now empty except for himself, Hummin, and the two young men.
Seldon said, "Id thought Id spend today sight-seeing."
"No. You dont want to do that. You go home now."
Seldon smiled. "Sorry. I wont."
The young man said to his partner. "You like his clothes, Marbie?"
Marbie spoke for the first time. "No. Disgusting. Turns the stomach."
"Cant let him go around turning stomachs, Marbie. Not good for peoples health."
"No, not by no means, Alem," said Marbie.
Alem grinned. "Well now. You heard what Marbie said."
And now Hummin spoke. He said, "Look, you two, Alem, Marbie, whatever your names are. Youve had your fun. Why dont you go away?"
Alem, who had been leaning slightly toward Seldon, straightened and turned. "Who are you?"
"Thats not your business," snapped Hummin.
"Youre Trantorian?" asked Alem.
"Also not your business."
Alem frowned and said, "Youre dressed Trantorian. Were not interested in you, so dont go looking for problems."
"I intend to stay. That means there are two of us. Two against two doesnt sound like your kind of fight. Why dont you go away and get some friends so you can handle two people?"
Seldon said, "I really think you ought to get away if you can, Hummin. Its kind of you to try to protect me, but I dont want you harmed."
"These are not dangerous people, Seldon. Just half-credit lackeys."
"Lackeys!" The word seemed to infuriate Alem, so that Seldon thought it must have a more insulting meaning on Trantor than it had on Helicon.
"Here, Marbie," said Alem with a growl. "You take care of that other motherlackey and Ill rip the clothes off this Seldon. Hes the one we want. Now--"
His hands came down sharply to seize Seldons lapels and jerk him upright.
Seldon pushed away, instinctively it would seem, and his chair tipped backward. He seized the hands stretched toward him, his foot went up, and his chair went down.
Somehow Alem streaked overhead, turning as he did so, and came down hard on his neck and back behind Seldon.
Seldon twisted as his chair went down and was quickly on his feet, staring down at Alem, then looking sharply to one side for Marbie. Alem lay unmoving, his face twisted in agony. He had two badly sprained thumbs, excruciating pain in his groin, and a backbone that had been badly jarred. Hummins left arm had grabbed Marbies neck from behind and his right arm had pulled the others right arm backward at a vicious angle. Marbies face was red as he labored uselessly for breath. A knife, glittering with a small laser inset, lay on the ground beside them.
Hummin eased his grip slightly and said, with an air of honest concern, "Youve hurt that one badly."
Seldon said, "Im afraid so. If he had fallen a little differently, he would have snapped his neck."
Hummin said, "What kind of a mathematician are you?"
"A Heliconian one." He stooped to pick up the knife and, after examining it, said, "Disgusting--and deadly."
Hummin said, "An ordinary blade would do the job without requiring a power source.--But lets let these two go. I doubt they want to continue any further."
He released Marbie, who rubbed first his shoulder then his neck. Gasping for air, he turned hate-filled eyes on the two men. Hummin said sharply, "You two had better get out of here. Otherwise well have to give evidence against you for assault and attempted murder. This knife can surely be traced to you."
Seldon and Hummin watched while Marbie dragged Alem to his feet and then helped him stagger away, still bent in pain. They looked back once or twice, but Seldon and Hummin watched impassively.
Seldon held out his hand. "How do I thank you for coming to the aid of a stranger against two attackers? I doubt I would have been able to handle them both on my own."
Hummin raised his hand in a deprecatory manner. "I wasnt afraid of them. Theyre just street-brawling lackeys. All I had to do was get my hands on them--and yours, too, of course."
"Thats a pretty deadly grip you have," Seldon mused.
Hummin shrugged. "You too." Then, without changing his tone of voice, he said, "Come on, wed better get out of here. Were wasting time."
Seldon said, "Why do we have to get away? Are you afraid those two will come back?"
"Not in their lifetime. But some of those brave people who cleared out of the park so quickly in their eagerness to spare themselves a disagreeable sight may have alerted the police."
"Fine. We have the hoodlums names. And we can describe them fairly well."
"Describe them? Why would the police want them?"
"They committed an assault--"
"Dont be foolish. We dont have a scratch. Theyre virtually hospital bait, especially Alem. Were the ones who will be charged."
"But thats impossible. Those people witnessed the fact that--"
"No people will be called.--Seldon, get this into your head. Those two came to find you--specifically you. They were told you were wearing Heliconian clothes and you must have been described precisely. Perhaps they were even shown a holograph. I suspect they were sent by the people who happen to control the police, so lets not wait any longer."
Hummin hurried off, his hand gripping Seldons upper arm. Seldon found the grip impossible to shake and, feeling like a child in the hands of an impetuous nurse, followed.
They plunged into an arcade and, before Seldons eyes grew accustomed to the dimmer light, they heard the burring sound of a ground-cars brakes.
"There they are," muttered Hummin. "Faster, Seldon." They hopped onto a moving corridor and lost themselves in the crowd.
第六章
第二部 逃亡
川陀……第一银河帝国的首都……在克里昂一世统治之下，它放射“黄昏的回光”。不论从哪方面看来，那时都是它的全盛期。它二亿平方公里的地表完全被穹顶覆盖（只有皇宫周围的区域例外），穹顶下面是个绵延不断的大都会，一直延伸到大陆棚之下。当时人口共有四百亿，虽然（回顾历史显而易见）有众多迹象显示问题早已丛生，川陀居民仍衷心视其为传说中的“永恒世界”，从未想到有一天它会……
——《银河百料全书》


第六章
谢顿抬起头来，看到一个年轻人站在面前，带着一种嘲弄的轻蔑低头望着他。那人身旁还有另一个年轻人，或许更年轻一点。两人都身材高大，看来十分强壮。
谢顿判断他们的衣着是川陀最前卫的流行服饰——大胆的相冲色彩，带纹饰的宽边皮带，有整圈阔檐的圆帽，此外还有一条亮丽的粉红色丝带，从帽檐两端一直延伸到后颈。
在谢顿眼中，这种打扮实在有趣，他不禁微微一笑。
他面前的年轻人吼道：“你龇牙咧嘴在笑什么，邋遢鬼？”
谢顿不理会对方说话的态度，好言好语地答道：“请原谅我刚才发笑，我只不过在欣赏你的服装。”
“我的服装？怎么样？你自己穿的是什么？你管这身可怕的碎布叫衣服吗？”他伸出一只手指碰了碰谢顿的外衣制领。与对方悦目的色调比较之下，谢顿心想，自己的衣服颜色沉重得很不体面。
谢顿说：“只怕我们外星人士的衣服就是这样，这是我仅有的款式。”
他不自觉地注意到，原本坐在小公园里的另外两三个人，此时正纷纷起身离去。仿佛他们预感会有麻烦出现，而不愿继续留在附近。谢顿很想知道他的新朋友，夫铭，是否也正要开溜，但他觉得将视线从面前的年轻人身上移开是不明智的举动。他将身子向后挪，稍微向椅背靠去。
年轻人说：“你是外星人士？”
“没错，故此才穿这身衣服。”
“故此？这是哪门子词汇？外星词汇吗？”
“我的意思是说，这就是你觉得我的衣服奇怪的缘故，我是一名游客。”
“从哪颗行星来的？”
“赫利肯。”
年轻人的两道眉毛挤存一起。“从来没听说过。”
“它不是一颗大行星。，”
“你为什么不回那里去？”
“我是要回去，我明天就走。”
“快一点！现在就走！”
年轻人看了看他的同伴，谢顿随着他的目光望去，结果瞥见了夫铭。他并没有离开，可是整座公园已经空了，剩下的只有他自己、夫铭，以及那两个年轻人。
谢顿说：“我本来打算今天到处逛逛。”
“不，你不想那么做。你现在就回去。”
谢顿微微一笑：“抱歉，我无法照办。”
年轻人对他的同伴说：“你喜欢他的衣服吗，马毕？”
马毕首度开口：“不喜欢，真恶心，令人反胃。”
“不能任由他到处乱跑，害得人人反胃，马毕。这样对大众的健康有害。”
“不行，绝对不可以，艾连。”马毕说。
艾连咧嘴笑了笑：“好啦，你听到马毕怎么说了。”
这时夫铭终于开口：“听着，你们两个，艾连、马牛，不管你们叫什么名字。你们玩够了，何不见好就收？”
艾连下身本来微微倾向谢顿，此时他把身子挺直，然后转过来。“你是谁？”
“不关你的事。”夫铭厉声应道。
“你是川陀人？”艾连问。
“这也不关你的事。”
艾连皱着眉头说：“你的穿着像个川陀人，我们对你没有兴趣，所以不要自找麻烦。”
“我打算留下，这就表示我们有两个人。二对二听来不像你们的打法，你们何不去找些朋友来对付我们两个？”
谢顿说：“我真的认为你该趁早离开这里，夫铭。你试图保护我，我很感激，可是我不希望你受到伤害。”
“这些人并非危险分子，谢顿，只不过是值半个信用点的奴才。”
“奴才！”这个词似乎把艾连惹火了，因此谢顿想到，它在川陀的意思一定比在赫利肯更具侮辱性。
“听好，马毕。”艾连咆哮道：“你对付另一个他妈的奴才，我来把这个谢顿的衣服剥光。他就是我们要找的人，动手——”
他双手猛然下探，想抓住谢顿的翻领，一把将他提起来。谢顿立刻本能地伸手一推，他的椅子同时往后翻倒。接着，他抓住探向自己的一双手，并抬起一只脚来，此时椅子刚好倒下。
艾连像是从谢顿的头上飞过，在空中打了一个转，最后落在谢顿身后。他的颈部与背部最先着地，发出了一声巨响。
当椅子倒下时，谢顿及时扭转身子，迅速站了起来，虎视眈眈地瞪着倒地的艾连。然后他猛转回头，望向一旁的马毕。
艾连瘫在地上一动不动，脸部肌肉痛得扭成一团。他的两只拇指严重扭伤，腹股沟传来锥心刺骨的痛楚，脊骨也受到重创。
夫铭的左臂从后而勾住马毕的颈部，右臂将对方的右臂向后拉到一个疼痛难忍的角度。马毕拼命想要喘气，涨得满脸通红。一把小刀躺在旁边的地上，刀缘的小型镭激光镶边正闪闪发光。
夫铭稍微松开手来以真挚的关切语调说：“你把那家伙伤得很重。”
谢顿说：“也许吧。如果他着地的角度再偏一点，他的脖子就会摔断。”
夫铭说：“你究竟是哪门子数学家？”
“赫利肯数学家。”他弯腰拾起那把刀子，
“真可恶，而且还能致命。”
夫铭说：“这种事普通利刃就足以应付了，根本不需要加装动力源——不过，还是让我们放这两个人走吧，我不相信他们想继续打下去。”
他松开马毕。马毕先揉揉肩膀，又搓了搓脖子，一面大口着喘气，一面狠狠瞪着两人。
夫铭厉声说道：“你们两个最好马上滚，否则我们将提出证据，控告你们伤害和杀人未遂。从这把刀就一定能追查到你们。”
在谢顿与犬铭的逼视下，马毕将艾连拖起来，扶着直不起腰的后者蹒跚离去。
他们回头望了一两眼，谢顿与夫铭却只是面无表情地看着他们。
谢顿伸出手来：“你帮我这个陌生人对付两个人的攻击，我该怎样感谢你？我真怀疑自己能否应付他们两个。”
夫铭举起一只手，做了个不表赞同的手势。“我并不怕他们，他们只不过是专门在街头闹事的奴才。我需要做的，只是把一双手放在他们身上——当然啦，你也一样。”
“你那一抓可真要命。”谢顿回想起刚才的情形。
夫铭耸了耸肩：“你也不简单——”然后，他以相同的语调说：“来吧，我们最好离开这里，我们正在浪费时间。”
谢顿说：“我们为什么必须离开？你怕那两个会再回来吗？”
“他们这辈子都不敢再来。不过，刚才为了避免撞见不愉快的场面，而从公园慌忙溜走的那些‘勇士’中，可能有人已经通知警方。”
“很好，我们知道那两个小流氓的名字，也能详细描述他们的长相。”
“描述他们的长相？警方有什么理由抓他们？”
“他们犯了蓄意伤害……”
“别傻了，我们连点擦伤也没有，他们却注定要在医院躺几天，尤其是那个艾连。被起诉的会是我们两个。”
“但这是不可能的，目睹事件经过的那些人……”
“不会有任何人被传唤。谢顿，把这点装进你的脑子里——那两个是来找你的，专门来找你的。有人告诉他们说你穿着赫利肯服装，而且一定将你描述得很准确，也许还让他们看过你的全息像。我怀疑派他们来的，就是控制警方的那些人，所以我们别在这里再待下去。”
夫铭一只于抓住谢顿的上臂，匆匆忙忙拉着他走。谢顿发觉自己不可能挣脱，就像落在性急保姆手中的小孩。只好乖乖地跟着他走。
他们冲进一条拱廊，在谢顿的眼睛尚未适应较暗的光线时，便传来一辆地面车的隆隆刹车声。
“他们来了。”夫铭低声说道，“快点，谢顿。”他们跳上一道活动回廊，消失在拥挤的人群中。
Chapter 7
Seldon had tried to persuade Hummin to take him to his hotel room, but Hummin would have none of that.
"Are you mad?" he half-whispered. "Theyll be waiting for you there."
"But all my belongings are waiting for me there too."
"Theyll just have to wait."
And now they were in a small room in a pleasant apartment structure that might be anywhere for all that Seldon could tell. He looked about the one-room unit. Most of it was taken up by a desk and chair, a bed, and a computer outlet. There were no dining facilities or washstand of any kind, though Hummin had directed him to a communal washroom down the hall. Someone had entered before Seldon was quite through. He had cast one brief and curious look at Seldons clothes, rather than at Seldon himself, and had then looked away. Seldon mentioned this to Hummin, who shook his head and said, "Well have to get rid of your clothes. Too bad Helicon is so far out of fashion--"
Seldon said impatiently, "How much of this might just be your imagination, Hummin? Youve got me half-convinced and yet it may be merely a kind of ... of--"
"Are you groping for the word paranoia?"
"All right, I am. This may be some strange paranoid notion of yours." Hummin said, "Think about it, will you? I cant argue it out mathematically, but youve seen the Emperor. Dont deny it. He wanted something from you and you didnt give it to him. Dont deny that either. I suspect that details of the future are what he wants and you refused. Perhaps Demerzel thinks youre only pretending not to have the details--that youre holding out for a higher price or that someone else is bidding for it too. Who knows? I told you that if Demerzel wants you, hell get you wherever you are. I told you that before those two splitheads ever appeared on the scene. Im a journalist and a Trantorian. I know how these things go. At one point, Alem said, Hes the one we want. Do you remember that?"
"As it happens," said Seldon. "I do."
"To him I was only the other motherlackey to be kept off, while he went about the real job of assaulting you."
Hummin sat down in the chair and pointed to the bed. "Stretch out, Seldon. Make yourself comfortable. Whoever sent those two--it must have been Demerzel, in my opinion--can send others, so well have to get rid of those clothes of yours. I think any other Heliconian in this sector caught in his own worlds garb is going to have trouble until he can prove he isnt you."
"Oh come on."
"I mean it. Youll have to take off the clothes and well have to atomize them--if we can get close enough to a disposal unit without being seen. And before we can do that Ill have to get you a Trantorian outfit. Youre smaller than I am and Ill take that into account. It wont matter if it doesnt fit exactly--"
Seldon shook his head. "I dont have the credits to pay for it. Not on me. What credits I have--and they arent much--are in my hotel safe."
"Well worry about that another time. Youll have to stay here for an hour or two while I go out in search of the necessary clothing."
Seldon spread his hands and sighed resignedly. "All right. If its that important, Ill stay."
"You wont try to get back to your hotel? Word of honor?"
"My word as a mathematician. But Im really embarrassed by all the trouble youre taking for me. And expense too. After all, despite all this talk about Demerzel, they werent really out to hurt me or carry me off. All I was threatened with was the removal of my clothes."
"Not all. They were also going to take you to the spaceport and put you on a hypership to Helicon."
"That was a silly threat--not to be taken seriously."
"Why not?"
"Im going to Helicon. I told them so. Im going tomorrow."
"And you still plan to go tomorrow?" asked Hummin.
"Certainly. Why not?"
"There are enormous reasons why not."
Seldon suddenly felt angry. "Come on, Hummin, I cant play this game any further. Im finished here and I want to go home. My tickets are in the hotel room. Otherwise Id try to exchange them for a trip today. I mean it."
"You cant go back to Helicon."
Seldon flushed. "Why not? Are they waiting for me there too?"
Hummin nodded. "Dont fire up, Seldon. They would be waiting for you there too.
Listen to me. If you go to Helicon, you are as good as in Demerzels hands. Helicon is good, safe Imperial territory. Has Helicon ever rebelled, ever fallen into step behind the banner of an anti-Emperor?"
"No, it hasnt--and for good reason. Its surrounded by larger worlds. It depends on the Imperial peace for security."
"Exactly! Imperial forces on Helicon can therefore count on the full cooperation of the local government. You would be under constant surveillance at all times. Any time Demerzel wants you, he will be able to have you. And, except for the fact that I am now warning you, you would have no knowledge of this and you would be working in the open, filled with a false security."
"Thats ridiculous. If he wanted me in Helicon, why didnt he simply leave me to myself? I was going there tomorrow. Why would he send those two hoodlums simply to hasten the matter by a few hours and risk putting me on my guard?"
"Why should he think you would be put on your guard? He didnt know Id be with you, immersing you in what you call my paranoia."
"Even without the question of warning me, why all the fuss to hurry me by a few hours?"
"Perhaps because he was afraid you would change your mind."
"And go where, if not home? If he could pick me up on Helicon, he could pick me up anywhere. He could pick me up on ... on Anacreon, a good ten thousand parsecs away--if it should fall into my head to go there. Whats distance to hyperspatial ships? Even if I find a world thats not quite as subservient to the Imperial forces as Helicon is, what world is in actual rebellion? The Empire is at peace. Even if some worlds are still resentful of injustices in the past, none are going to defy the Imperial armed forces to protect me. Moreover, anywhere but on Helicon I wont be a local citizen and there wont even be that matter of principle to help keep the Empire at bay."
Hummin listened patiently, nodding slightly, but looking as grave and as imperturbable as ever. He said, "Youre right, as far as you go, but theres one world that is not really under the Emperors control. That, I think, is what must be disturbing Demerzel."
Seldon thought a while, reviewing recent history and finding himself unable to choose a world on which the Imperial forces might be helpless. He said at last, "What world is that?"
Hummin said, "Youre on it, which is what makes the matter so dangerous in Demerzels eyes, I imagine. It is not so much that he is anxious to have you go to Helicon, as that he is anxious to have you leave Trantor before it occurs to you, for any reason--even if only tourists mania--to stay."
The two men sat in silence until Seldon finally said sardonically, "Trantor! The capital of the Empire, with the home base of the fleet on a space station in orbit about it, with the best units of the army quartered here. If you believe that it is Trantor that is the safe world, youre progressing from paranoia to outright fantasy."
"No! Youre an Outworlder, Seldon. You dont know what Trantor is like. Its forty billion people and there are few other worlds with even a tenth of its population. It is of unimaginable technological and cultural complexity. Where we are now is the Imperial Sector--with the highest standard of living in the Galaxy and populated entirely by Imperial functionaries. Elsewhere on the planet, however, are over eight hundred other sectors, some of them with subcultures totally different from what we have here and most of them untouchable by Imperial forces."
"Why untouchable?"
"The Empire cannot seriously exert force against Trantor. To do so would be bound to shake some facet or other of the technology on which the whole planet depends. The technology is so interrelated that to snap one of the interconnections is to cripple the whole. Believe me, Seldon, we on Trantor observe what happens when there is an earthquake that manages to escape being damped out, a volcanic eruption that is not vented in time, a storm that is not defused, or just some human error that escapes notice. The planet totters and every effort must be made to restore the balance at once."
"I have never heard of such a thing."
A small smile flickered its way across Hummins face. "Of course not. Do you want the Empire to advertise the weakness at its core? However, as a journalist, I know what happens even when the Outworlds dont, even when much of Trantor itself doesnt, even when the Imperial pressure is interested in concealing events. Believe me! The Emperor knows--and Eto Demerzel knows--even if you dont, that to disturb Trantor may destroy the Empire."
"Then are you suggesting I stay on Trantor for that reason?"
"Yes. I can take you to a place on Trantor where you will be absolutely safe from Demerzel. You wont have to change your name and you will be able to operate entirely in the open and he wont be able to touch you. Thats why he wanted to force you off Trantor at once and if it hadnt been for the quirk of fate that brought us together and for your surprising ability to defend yourself, he would have succeeded in doing so."
"But how long will I have to remain on Trantor?"
"For as long as your safety requires it, Seldon. For the rest of your life, perhaps."
第七章
　　谢顿试图说服夫铭带自己回到下榻的旅馆，可是夫铭不肯答应。
“你疯了吗？”他以近乎耳语的音量说，“他们会在那里等你。”
“可是我所有的家当也在那里等我。”
“它们只好等一阵子。”
此刻他们待在一栋公寓的一间小房间里，这是一栋优雅宜人的公寓，谢顿对它的位置没有丝毫概念。他环顾这个仅有一间房的住处，一张书桌、一把椅子、一张床铺，以及一套计算机终端机，几乎占去大部分空间。房间里没有用餐设备，也没有盥洗台，不过先前夫铭曾带他到走廊尽头的公用盥洗间。当谢顿快出来的时候，刚好有个人进去，那人没怎么沣感谢顿本人，却对谢顿的衣服投以短暂而好奇的目光，然后就别过脸去。
谢顿向夫铭提起这事，后者摇了摇头，说道：“我们得把你这身农服换掉，只怪赫利肯那么跟不上时尚……”
谢顿不耐烦地说：“这有多少可能只是你的幻想，夫铭？你让我相信了一半，但它或许只是一种……一种……”
“你是不是想说‘妄想症’？”
“没错，我就是想这么说，这一切可能只是你的古怪妄想。”
大铭说：“能不能麻烦你动一动脑筋？我不能用数学方法做出论证，可是你见过皇上，别否认这一点。他要从你这里得到些什么，而你却没有给他，这点也别否认。我猜想他要的就是有关未来的详情，而你拒绝了。也许丹莫茨尔认为，你只是假装未曾掌握详情，你是在待价而沽，或是其他人也在收买你。谁知道呢？我告诉过你，假如丹莫茨尔想要你，小论你到天涯海角也会被他找到。在那两个脑袋短路的家伙出场前，我就对你那么说了。我是一名记者，也是个川陀人，我知道这种事会如何发展。在某个节骨眼，艾连曾说‘他就是我们要找的人’，你还记得吗？”
“我刚好记得。”谢顿答道。
“对他而言，我只是个碍事的‘他妈的奴才’，他只顾完成任务，那就是攻击你。”
夫铭坐到椅子上，指着床铺说：“舒展一下四肢，谢顿，尽量放轻松点。那两个不论是谁派来的——我看，一定就是丹莫茨尔——他还会派其他人来，所以我们得把你这身衣服换掉。我想本区其他赫利肯人被撞见时，要是他刚好穿着母星服装，就一定会惹上一场麻烦，直到他能证明他不是你。”
“噢，得了吧。”
“我没开玩笑。你一定要把这身衣服脱掉，然后我们必须把它原子化——假如我们能偷偷接近一台废物处理器。在此之前，我得先帮你找一套川陀服装。你的身材比我小，我会考虑到这点。即使不完全合身也没关系……”
谢顿摇了摇头。“我没有信用点付账，没带出来。我所有的信用点——其实也没多少——全都在旅馆的保险箱里。”
“这点我们改天再说。我出去张罗必要的衣物时，你得在这里先待上一两个钟头。”
谢顿摊开双手，叹了一口气表示让步。“好吧，如果真的那么重要，我就待着吧。”
“你不会试图跑回旅馆吧？荣誉担保。”
“我以数学家的荣誉担保。可是给你惹了这么多麻烦，我已经觉得过意不去，还要让你为我破费……毕竟，虽然你把丹莫茨尔说得那么厉害，他们并非真想伤害我或把我带走。我唯一受到的威胁，只不过是要把我的衣服脱掉。”
“不只如此，他们还想押你到太空航站，把你送进一艘飞什赫利肯的超空间飞船。”
“那是个傻气的威胁，我们不必认真。”
“为什么？”
“我马上要回赫利肯，我告诉过他们，明天就会动身。”
“你仍打算明天走吗？”夫铭问。
“当然啦，有何不可？”
“不可的原因多得很。”
谢顿突然感到不高兴：“得，吧，夫铭，我不能再陪你玩这种游戏。我在此地的事情办完了，现在想要回家去。我的旅行票在旅馆房问里，否则我会试图将行程改成今天，我是说真的。”
“你不能回赫利肯。”
谢顿涨红了脸：“为什么不能？他们也在那里等我吗？”
夫铭点了点头：“别发火，谢顿，他们一定也会在那里等你。听我说，如果你到赫利肯去，等于落入丹莫茨尔的手掌心。赫利肯是个忠实可靠的帝国领域。赫利肯曾叛变吗？曾追随过反帝旗帜吗？”
“没有，从来没有，而且理由允分。它周遭都是较大的世界，需要帝国的和平确保它的安全。”
“正是如此，所以驻扎赫利肯的帝国军队能得到当地政府的全面协助，你将时时刻刻受到严密监视。不论丹莫茨尔什么时候想要你，都有办法把你找出来。而且，要不是我现在警告你，你对这件事根本毫不知情，你会一直公开活动，一心以为安全无虞。”
“实在是荒谬。如果他希望我待在赫利肯，为什么不干脆让我自动离去？反正我明天就要走了。他为何要派两个小流氓来，只为了让这件事提早几小时发生，却冒着让我提高警觉的危险？”
“他怎么想得到你会提高警觉？他不知道我会跟你在一起，给你灌输一些你所谓的妄想。”
“即使他们不担心这一点，可是如此大费周折，让我提早几小时动身又是为什么？”
“或许因为他担心你会改变主意。”
“不回家的话，我到哪里去？如果他能在赫利肯抓到我，我到任何地方照样会被他抓到。比方说，他能在……在足有一万秒差距之外的安纳克瑞昂把我抓到——假使我竟异想天开躲到那里。对超空间飞船而言，距离算什么呢？就算我找到一个世界，不像赫利肯那样对帝国军队百依百顺，又有哪个世界真正在造反？帝国目前处于和平时期，即使有些世界对过去的不公仍愤愤不平，却没一个会为了保护我而招惹帝国的武装部队。更何况，除了赫利肯，我在其他地方都不具公民身份，他们根本没有义务阻止帝国对我的搜捕。”
夫铭一直耐心倾听，不时轻轻点一下头，但他严肃、镇静的神情依旧。“目前为止你说的都对，可是有个世界并非真正在皇上控制之下。这一点，我想，一定就是丹莫茨尔寝食难安的原因。”
谢顿想了一会儿，回顾近代发生的历史，怎么也想不出哪个世界可能令帝国军队束手无策。最后他只好问：“究竟是哪个世界？”
夫铭说：“就在你的脚下。我想，丹莫茨尔就是因为这样才觉得非常危急。与其说他急着要你回赫利肯，不如说他急着要你尽快离开川陀，以免你突然又想留下来——不论因为任何理由，哪怕只是留恋此地的风光。”
两人默默对坐了一阵子，谢顿终于以讥讽的口吻说：“川陀！帝国的首都，轨道太空站中有舰队的大本营，地面驻扎有最精锐的部队。假如你相信川陀就是那个安全的世界，你的妄想症已经进展到彻底的幻想。”
“不！你是一名外星人士，谢顿。你不知道川陀是什么样子。它拥有四百亿人口，银河之中人口数目能及上它十分之一的世界都不多；它有难以想象的科技与文化复杂度。我们现在位于皇区，这里的生活水平是全银河之冠，居民全部是帝国的大小官员。然而在这颗行星的其他地方，总共有超过八百个行政区，某些区的文化和我们这里完全不同，而且大都不是帝国军队能掌控的。”
“为什么不能掌控？”
“帝国不能真正对川陀动用武力。这么做的话，一定会动摇某个科技层面。这些科技是整个行星命脉所系，相互之问有牵一发而动全身的关系，弄断了任何一个联系，都会使整个科技完全瘫痪。相信我，谢顿，我们住在川陀的人都目睹过这种情形，例如一个未能成功阻止的地震、一次未曾及时疏导的火山爆发、一阵没有预先消灭的暴风，或必是个没人留意的人为错误。发生这些天灾人祸之后，这颗行星立刻摇摇欲坠，必须尽一切力量尽快恢复原有的平衡。”
“我从没听过这种事。”
夫铭的脸上闪过一丝笑容：“当然没有。你想要帝国大肆宣传核心深处的弱点吗？然而身为一名记者，即使外星人士不知道，即使川陀大多数人蒙在鼓里，即使帝国当局尽力隐瞒真相，我却对这种情形一清二楚。相信我！虽然你不晓得，但是皇上心里明内，丹莫茨尔也知道——侵扰川陀就可能摧毁整个帝圈。”
“那么，你因此建议我留在川陀？”
“没错，我可以带你到一个地方，你在那里将绝对安全，不必担心丹莫茨尔。你不用改名换姓，可以完全公开活动，他却对你无可奈何，这就是他想逼你立刻离开川陀的原因。若非命运之神将我们拉到一块，你又有出人意料的自卫本领，那么他的计划已经成功了。”
“可是我得在川陀待多久？”
“视你的安全情况而定，谢顿，该多久就多久。或许，你下半辈子都不能再离开。”
Chapter 8

Hari Seldon looked at the holograph of himself cast by Hummins projector. It was more dramatic and useful than a mirror would have been. In fact, it seemed as though there were two of him in the room.
Seldon studied the sleeve of his new tunic. His Heliconian attitudes made him wish the colors were less vibrant, but he was thankful that, as it was, Hummin had chosen softer colors than were customary here on this world. (Seldon thought of the clothing worn by their two assailants and shuddered inwardly.) He said, "And I suppose I must wear this hat."
"In the Imperial Sector, yes. To go bareheaded here is a sign of low breeding. Elsewhere, the rules are different."
Seldon sighed. The round hat was made of soft material and molded itself to his head when he put it on. The brim was evenly wide all around, but it was narrower than on the hats his attackers had worn. Seldon consoled himself by noticing that when he wore the hat the brim curved rather gracefully. "It doesnt have a strap under the chin."
"Of course not. Thats advanced fashion for young lanks."
"For young what?"
"A lank is someone who wears things for their shock value. Im sure you have such people on Helicon."
Seldon snorted. "There are those who wear their hair shoulder-length on one side and shave the other." He laughed at the memory. Hummins mouth twisted slightly. "I imagine it looks uncommonly ugly."
"Worse. There are lefties and righties, apparently, and each finds the other version highly offensive. The two groups often engage in street brawls."
"Then I think you can stand the hat, especially without the strap."
Seldon said, "Ill get used to it."
"It will attract some attention. Its subdued for one thing and makes you look as if youre in mourning. And it doesnt quite fit. Then, too, you wear it with obvious discomfort. However, we wont be in the Imperial Sector long.--Seen enough?" And the holograph flickered out.
Seldon said, "How much did this cost you?"
"Whats the difference?"
"It bothers me to be in your debt."
"Dont worry about it. This is my choice. But weve been here long enough. I will have been described, Im quite certain. Theyll track me down and theyll come here."
"In that case," said Seldon, "the credits youre spending are a minor matter. Youre putting yourself into personal danger on my account. Personal danger!"
"I know that. But its my free choice and I can take care of myself."
"But why--"
"Well discuss the philosophy of it later.--Ive atomized your clothes, by the way, and I dont think I was seen. There was an energy surge, of course, and that would be recorded. Someone might guess what happened from that--its hard to obscure any action when probing eyes and mind are sharp enough. However, let us hope well be safely away before they put it all together."
第八章
　　哈里•谢顿望着自己的全息像，它是由夫铭的投影机投射出来的，这要比照镜子更醒目、更实用。事实上，现在房间里仿佛有两个谢顿。
谢顿仔细打量这件新短袖上衣的袖子，赫利肯心态使他希望色调最好再朴素点，但他还是谢天谢地，因为夫铭选择的颜色已比这个世界流行的柔和许多。（谢顿想到那两个小流氓穿的衣服，心中便打了一个寒战。）
他说：“我想我得戴上这顶帽子。”
“在皇区中的确如此，这里不戴帽子是没教养的象征。但是在别的地方，礼俗则又有不同。”
谢顿叹了一口气。这顶圆帽以柔软的材料制成，戴上后会根据他的头型自动调整。整圈帽檐都一样宽，但比那两个小流氓的帽檐要窄些。谢顿注意到戴上帽子之后，帽檐弯成一个优雅的弧度，这才稍稍感到安慰一些。
“它没有系在下巴底下的帽带。”
“当然没有，那是年轻朋客最前卫的流行。”
“年轻什么？”
“朋客，是指为了惊世骇俗而穿戴某些衣饰的人，我确信你们赫利肯上也有这种人。”
谢顿哼了一声：“有些人把一边头发留到齐肩的长度，却把另外一边剃光。”想到那种样子，他不禁笑出声来。
夫铭嘴角微微撇了一下：“我想那样一定难看极了。”
“还有更糟的呢。他们显然还分左派和右派，双方都无法忍受对方的发型，两派经常在街头大打出手。”
“那么，我想你应该能忍受这顶帽子，何况它没有帽带。”
谢顿说：“我会习惯的。”
“它会吸引一些注意。一来是它的颜色太素，让你看起来像是正在服丧；二来大小也不很合适。此外，你戴着它显然看来很不舒服。然而我们不会在皇区太久——看够了吗？”全息像立即消失无踪。
谢顿说：“这总共花了你多少钱？”
“有什么关系吗？”
“欠你的钱令我不安。”
“别为这种事烦心，这是我自己的选择。不过我们在这里待得够久了，会有人记得我的长相，这点我相当确定。他们会一路追踪我，最后找到这里来。”
“这么说的话。”谢顿说，“你花费的信用点就微不足道。你为了我而令自己身陷险境！”
“我知道，但这出于我的自愿，而且我能照顾自己。”
“可是为什么……”
“以后我们再来讨论其中的道理吧——对了，我已将你的衣服原子化，而且我想没被别人看见。当然，出现了一道能量涌浪，那是会留下记录的。有人可能会根据这点猜到是怎么回事，在灵敏的耳目窥探下，实在很难掩饰所有的行动。然而希望在他们将一切拼凑起来之前，我们已经安全离开此地。”
Chapter 9

They traveled along walkways where the light was soft and yellow. Hummins eyes moved this way and that, watchful, and he kept their pace at crowd speed, neither passing nor being passed.
He kept up a mild but steady conversation on indifferent topics. Seldon, edgy and unable to do the same, said, "There seems to be a great deal of walking here. There are endless lines in both directions and along the crossovers."
"Why not?" said Hummin. "Walking is still the best form of short-distance transportation. Its the most convenient, the cheapest, and the most healthful. Countless years of technological advance have not changed that.--Are you acrophobic, Seldon?"
Seldon looked over the railing on his right into a deep declivity that separated the two walking lanes--each in an opposite direction between the regularly spaced crossovers. He shuddered slightly. "If you mean fear of heights, not ordinarily. Still, looking down isnt pleasant. How far does it go down?"
"Forty or fifty levels at this point, I think. This sort of thing is common in the Imperial Sector and a few other highly developed regions. In most places, one walks at what might be considered ground level."
"I should imagine this would encourage suicide attempts."
"Not often. There are far easier methods. Besides, suicide is not a matter of social obloquy on Trantor. One can end ones life by various recognized methods in centers that exist for the purpose--if one is willing to go through some psychotherapy at first. There are, occasional accidents, for that matter, but thats not why I was asking about acrophobia. Were heading for a taxi rental where they know me as a journalist. Ive done favors for them occasionally and sometimes they do favors for me in return. Theyll forget to record me and wont notice that I have a companion. Of course, Ill have to pay a premium and, again of course, if Demerzels people lean on them hard enough, theyll have to tell the truth and put it down to slovenly accounting, but that may take considerable time."
"Where does the acrophobia come in?"
"Well, we can get there a lot faster if we use a gravitic lift. Not many people use it and I must tell you that Im not overjoyed at the idea myself, but if you think you can handle it, we had better."
"Whats a gravitic lift?"
"Its experimental. The time may come when it will be widespread over Trantor, provided it becomes psychologically acceptable--or can be made so to enough people. Then, maybe, it will spread to other worlds too. Its an elevator shaft without an elevator cab, so to speak. We just step into empty space and drop slowly--or rise slowly--under the influence of antigravity. Its about the only application of antigravity thats been established so far, largely because its the simplest possible application."
"What happens if the power blinks out while were in transit?"
"Exactly what you would think. We fall and--unless were quite near the bottom to begin with--we die. I havent heard of it happening yet and, believe me, if it had happened I would know. We might not be able to give out the news for security reasons--thats the excuse they always advance for hiding bad news--but I would know. Its just up ahead. If you cant manage it, we wont do it, but the corridors are slow and tedious and many find them nauseating after a while." Hummin turned down a crossover and into a large recess where a line of men and women were waiting, one or two with children.
Seldon said in a low voice, "I heard nothing of this back home. Of course, our own news media are terribly local, but youd think thered be some mention that this sort of thing exists."
Hummin said. "Its strictly experimental and is confined to the Imperial Sector. It uses more energy than its worth, so the government is not really anxious to push it right now by giving it publicity. The old Emperor, Stanel VI, the one before Cleon who amazed everyone by dying in his bed, insisted on having it installed in a few places. He wanted his name associated with antigravity, they say, because he was concerned with his place in history, as old men of no great attainments frequently are. As I said, the technique may spread, but, on the other hand, it is possible that nothing much more than the gravitic lift will ever come of it."
"What do they want to come of it?" asked Seldon.
"Antigrav spaceflight. That, however, will require many breakthroughs and most physicists, as far as I know, are firmly convinced it is out of the question. But, then, most thought that even gravitic lifts were out of the question."
The line ahead was rapidly growing shorter and Seldon found himself standing with Hummin at the edge of the floor with an open gap before him. The air ahead faintly glittered. Automatically, he reached out his hand and felt a light shock. It didnt hurt, but he snatched his hand back quickly.
Hummin grunted. "An elementary precaution to prevent anyone walking over the edge before activating the controls." He punched some numbers on the control board and the glitter vanished.
Seldon peered over the edge, down the deep shaft. "You might find it better--or easier," said Hummin, "if we link arms and if you close your eyes. It wont take more than a few seconds."
He gave Seldon no choice, actually. He took his arm and once again there was no hanging back in that firm grip. Hummin stepped into nothingness and Seldon (who heard himself, to his own embarrassment, emit a small squeak) shuffled off with a lurch.
He closed his eyes tightly and experienced no sense of falling, no feeling of air movement. A few seconds passed and he was pulled forward. He tripped slightly, caught his balance, and found himself on solid ground. He opened his eyes, "Did we make it?"
Hummin said dryly, "Were not dead," then walked away, his grip forcing Seldon to follow.
"I mean, did we get to the right level?"
"Of course."
"What would have happened if we were dropping down and someone else was moving upward?"
"There are two separate lanes. In one lane everyone drops at the same speed; in the other everyone rises at the same speed. The shaft clears only when there are no people within ten meters of each other. There is no chance of a collision if all works well."
"I didnt feel a thing."
"Why should you? There was no acceleration. After the first tenth of a second, you were at constant speed and the air in your immediate vicinity was moving down with you at the same speed."
"Marvelous."
"Absolutely. But uneconomic. And there seems no great pressure to increase the efficiency of the procedure and make it worthwhile. Everywhere one hears the same refrain. We cant do it. It cant be done. It applies to everything." Hummin shrugged in obvious anger and said, "But were here at the taxi rental.
Lets get on with it."
第九章
　　他们沿着人行道往前走，四周是柔和、昏黄的光线。夫铭一直警觉地将眼睛转来转去，并让他们的步调与人群保持一致，既没有超越他人，也没有被人超过。
他不断找些无关的话题，有一句没一句地闲聊着，始终没有间断。
心浮气躁的谢顿无法做到这点，他说：“这里的人似乎很喜欢步行，来往方向的人行道和天桥上都是无尽的人潮。”
“有何不对？”丈铭说，“步行仍是短程交通的最佳方式，是最方便、最便宜，也是最健康的，无数年的科技进展未曾改变这个事实。你有恐高症吗，谢顿？”
谢顿从右手边的栏杆往下看，下面是一道很深的斜坡，将两条人行道分隔开来。两者的通行方向相反，每隔固定距离设有一座天桥。他看得有点发抖。“你若是指害怕站在高处，我通常不会。不过，往下看还是不怎么好玩。下面有多深？”
“大概有四十到五十层楼高吧，我想。这种设施在皇区，以及其他一些高度发达的区域都很常见。在大部分地区，人们则在所谓的地面下行走。”
“我有一种想法，这样会鼓励人们萌生自杀的念头。”
“很少有这种事，想自杀还有简单得多的方法。此外，自杀在川陀并非社会不容的行为。在一些特定的中心，有各种被认可的方法供人结束性命，只要你愿意先花点时间，接受一下心理治疗。至于意外，偶尔也会发生几桩，但这不是我问你有没有恐高症的原因。我们正要去租车站，那里的人知道我是记者。我偶尔会帮他们一些小忙，有时他们也会回报我一下。他们会忘记把我记录下来，也不会注意到我有个同伴。当然，我得多付一笔钱。而且话说回来，若是丹莫茨尔的手下逼得太凶，他们最后还是得吐露实情，推说那是因为会计过于马虎，但那可能需要不少时间。”
“恐高症跟这又有什么关系？”
“嗯，如果我们利用重力升降机，可以快些到达那里。没有多少人利用这种设衔，而且我必须告诉你，我自己也不太喜欢这个主意。但如果你自认应付得了，我们最好还是这么做。”
“什么是重力升降机？”
“它还在实验阶段，有一天也许会在川陀普及，只要大众在心理上能接受，或是说可让足够多的人接受。到那个时候，或许它也会流传到其他世界。可以这么说，它是一种没有升降舱的升降通道。我们只要走进空旷的空间，就会在反重力作用下缓缓坠落，或是缓缓上升。直到目前为止，它大概是应用反重力的唯一装置，主要因为这是最简单的一种应用。”
“我们在半空的时候，万一动力突然消失，那会怎么样？”
“正如你所想的那样，我们会往下掉——除非当时相当接近底层，否则我们准死无疑。我还没听说发生过这种事，相信我，要是发生过的话，我一定会知道。我们也许不能发布这种新闻，因为基于安全的考虑——那是他们隐瞒坏消息的一贯借口，但我自己总有办法知道。它就在前面，你要是不能应付，那我们就别去。可是活动回廊既缓慢又沉闷，很多人不一会儿就感到头昏。”
夫铭转进一座天桥，来到一个大型凹室，那里已经有些男女在排队等候，其中一两位还带着小孩。
谢顿压低声音说：“我在家乡从未听过这种东西。当然，我们的媒体过分注重地方新闻，可是想来总该提到这种东西的存在吧。”
夫铭说：“这完全是实验性的设施，而且仅限于皇区。它使用的能量不敷成本，因此政府并不急于推广，不想过早公之于世。克里昂之前的那位老皇帝——斯达涅尔五世，他能寿终正寝令每个人都不敢相信——坚持要在几个地方装设这种升降机。据说，他是想让自己的名字和反重力连在一起，因为他很关心自己在历史上的地位，这是没什么成就的老人常有的心态。正如我所说的，这种科技将来可能广为流传，不过，也可能除了升降机之外，不会再有任何其他应用。”
“他们还希望将它应用在什么地方？”谢顿问道。
“反重力太空飞行，然而那需要很多的技术性突破；据我所知，大多数物理学家坚决相信绝无可能——话说回来，当初，他们大多认为连重力升降机都绝无可能。”
前面的队伍很快变得越来越短，谢顿发现已经与夫铭站在地板的边缘，前方是道开阔的缝隙，面前的空气发出微微闪光。他自然而然伸出手去，感到一阵轻微的发麻。虽然不算痛，但他迅速将手缩回来。
大铭咕哝道：“这是基本的防范措施，以防有人在控制钮开启前越过界限。”他在控制板上按下几个数宁，闪光随即消失无踪。
谢顿站在边缘往下望，见到的是一条深邃的升降通道。
“如果我们勾着手臂，你再把眼睛闭起来，”夫铭说，“你也许会觉得比较好，或者说比较容易。顶多只有几秒钟时间。”
事实下，他令谢顿毫无选择余地。被他紧紧抓住手臂之后，谢顿又跟上次一样无法挣脱。夫铭向一片虚空走去，谢顿（他听见自己发出一小声尖叫，感到很不好意思）拖着踉跄的脚步尾随在后，他紧闭双眼，并未体会到降落的感觉，也未曾察觉空气的流动。几秒钟之后，他被一股力量往前拉，赶紧向前迈出一步才恢复平衡，此时他发现自己再度脚踏实地。
他张开眼睛。“我们成功了吗？”
夫铭冷冷地说：“我们没有死。”然后便往前走，被他抓着的谢顿只好亦步亦趋。
“我的意思是，我们到达要去的楼层了吗？”
“当然。”
“如果我们落下的时候，正好有人往上运动，那会发生什么事？”
“总共有两条不同的路径。在其中一条路径中，大家以相同的速率下落，另一条中的人则以相同的速率上升。只有在确定每个人至少相隔十米时，升降通道才能出入。如果一切运作正常，不可能有相撞的机会。”
“我一点感觉都没有。”
“为什么会有？根本没有加速度。除了最初的十分之一秒，你一直在进行等速运动，你周遭的空气也以同样速率跟着你降落。”
“不可思议。”
“的确不可思议，可是并不经济。而且似乎没有多迫切的需要能使它增进效率，变得真正有价值。不论在何处，总是能听到同样的老调：‘我们做不到，那是不可能的。’这种话适用于任何事。”夫铭耸了耸肩，显然是动了气。“无论如何，我们总算到了租车站，让我们进行下一个行动吧。”
Chapter 10

Seldon tried to look inconspicuous at the air-taxi rental terminus, which he found difficult. To look ostentatiously inconspicuous--to slink about, to turn his face away from all who passed, to study one of the vehicles overintently--was surely the way to invite attention. The way to behave was merely to assume an innocent normality.
But what was normality? He felt uncomfortable in his clothes. There were no pockets, so he had no place to put his hands. The two pouches, which dangled from his belt on either side, distracted him by hitting against him as he moved, so that he was continually thinking someone had nudged him. He tried looking at women as they passed. They had no pouches, at least none dangling, but they carried little boxlike affairs that they occasionally clipped to one hip or another by some device he could not make out. It was probably pseudomagnetic, he decided. Their clothes were not particularly revealing, he noted regretfully, and not one had any sign of d閏olletage, although some dresses seemed to be designed to emphasize the buttocks. Meanwhile, Hummin had been very businesslike, having presented the necessary credits and returned with the superconductive ceramic tile that would activate a specific air-taxi.
Hummin said, "Get in, Seldon," gesturing to a small two-seated vehicle.
Seldon asked, "Did you have to sign your name, Hummin?"
"Of course not. They know me here and dont stand on ceremony."
"What do they think youre doing?"
"They didnt ask and I volunteered no information." He inserted the tile and Seldon felt a slight vibration as the air-taxi came to life. "Were headed for D-7," said Hummin, making conversation.
Seldon didnt know what D-7 was, but he assumed it meant some route or other. The air-taxi found its way past and around other ground-cars and finally moved onto a smooth upward-slanting track and gained speed. Then it lifted upward with a slight jolt.
Seldon, who had been automatically strapped in by a webbed restraint, felt himself pushed down into his seat and then up against the webbing. He said, "That didnt feel like antigravity."
"It wasnt," said Hummin. "That was a small jet reaction. Just enough to take us up to the tubes."
What appeared before them now looked like a cliff patterned with cave openings, much like a checkerboard. Hummin maneuvered toward the D-7 opening, avoiding other air-taxis that were heading for other tunnels.
"You could crash easily," said Seldon, clearing his throat.
"So I probably would if everything depended on my senses and reactions, but the taxi is computerized and the computer can overrule me without trouble. The same is true for the other taxis.--Here we go."
They slid into D-7 as if they had been sucked in and the bright light of the open plaza outside mellowed, turning a warmer yellow hue. Hummin released the controls and sat back. He drew a deep breath and said, "Well, thats one stage successfully carried through. We might have been stopped at the station. In here, were fairly safe."
The ride was smooth and the walls of the tunnel slipped by rapidly. There was almost no sound, just a steady velvety whirr as the taxi sped along. "How fast are we going?" asked Seldon.
Hummin cast an eye briefly at the controls. "Three hundred and fifty kilometers per hour."
"Magnetic propulsion?"
"Yes. You have it on Helicon, I imagine."
"Yes. One line. Ive never been on it myself, though Ive always meant to. I dont think its anything like this."
"Im sure it isnt. Trantor has many thousands of kilometers of these tunnels honeycombing the land subsurface and a number that snake under the shallower extensions of the ocean. Its the chief method of long-distance travel."
"How long will it take us?"
"To reach our immediate destination? A little over five hours."
"Five hours!" Seldon was dismayed.
"Dont be disturbed. We pass rest areas every twenty minutes or so where we can stop, pull out of the tunnel, stretch our feet, eat, or relieve ourselves. Id like to do that as few times as possible, of course."
They continued on in silence for a while and then Seldon started when a blaze of light flared at their right for a few seconds and, in the flash, he thought he saw two air-taxis.
"That was a rest area," said Hummin in answer to the unspoken question.
Seldon said, "Am I really going to be safe wherever it is you are taking me?"
Hummin said, "Quite safe from any open movement on the part of the Imperial forces. Of course, when it comes to the individual operator--the spy, the agent, the hired assassin--one must always be careful. Naturally, I will supply you with a bodyguard."
Seldon felt uneasy. "The hired assassin? Are you serious? Would they really want to kill me?"
Hummin said, "Im sure Demerzel doesnt. I suspect he wants to use you rather than kill you. Still, other enemies may turn up or there may be unfortunate concatenations of events. You cant go through life sleepwalking."
Seldon shook his head and turned his face away. To think, only forty-eight hours ago he had been just an insignificant, virtually unknown Outworld mathematician, content only to spend his remaining time on Trantor sight-seeing, gazing at the enormity of the great world with his provincial eye. And now, it was finally sinking in: He was a wanted man, hunted by Imperial forces. The enormity of the situation seized him and he shuddered.
"And what about you and what youre doing right now?"
Hummin said thoughtfully, "Well, they wont feel kindly toward me, I suppose. I might have my head laid open or my chest exploded by some mysterious and never-found assailant."
Hummin said it without a tremor in his voice or a change in his calm appearance, but Seldon winced.
Seldon said, "I rather thought you would assume that might be in store for you. You dont seem to be ... bothered by it."
"Im an old Trantorian. I know the planet as well as anybody can. I know many people and many of them are under obligation to me. I like to think that I am shrewd and not easy to outwit. In short, Seldon, I am quite confident that I can take care of myself."
"Im glad you feel that way and I hope youre justified in thinking so, Hummin, but I cant get it through my head why youre taking this chance at all. What am I to you? Why should you take even the smallest risk for someone who is a stranger to you?"
Hummin checked the controls in a preoccupied manner and then he faced Seldon squarely, eyes steady and serious.
"I want to save you for the same reason that the Emperor wants to use you--for your predictive powers."
Seldon felt a deep pang of disappointment. This was not after all a question of being saved. He was merely the helpless and disputed prey of competing predators. He said angrily, "I will never live down that presentation at the Decennial Convention. I have ruined my life."
"No. Dont rush to conclusions, mathematician. The Emperor and his officers want you for one reason only, to make their own lives more secure. They are interested in your abilities only so far as they might be used to save the Emperors rule, preserve that rule for his young son, maintain the positions, status, and power of his officials. I, on the other hand, want your powers for the good of the Galaxy."
"Is there a distinction?" spat Seldon acidly.
And Hummin replied with the stern beginning of a frown, "If you do not see the distinction, then that is to your shame. The human occupants of the Galaxy existed before this Emperor who now rules, before the dynasty he represents, before the Empire itself. Humanity is far older than the Empire. It may even be far older than the twenty-five million worlds of the Galaxy. There are legends of a time when humanity inhabited a single world."
"Legends!" said Seldon, shrugging his shoulders.
"Yes, legends, but I see no reason why that may not have been so in fact, twenty thousand years ago or more. I presume that humanity did not come into existence complete with knowledge of hyperspatial travel. Surely, there must have been a time when people could not travel at superluminal velocities and they must then have been imprisoned in a single planetary system. And if we look forward in time, the human beings of the worlds of the Galaxy will surely continue to exist after you and the Emperor are dead, after his whole line comes to an end, and after the institutions of the Empire itself unravel. In that case, it is not important to worry overmuch about individuals, about the Emperor and the young Prince Imperial. It is not important to worry even about the mechanics of Empire. What of the quadrillions of people that exist in the Galaxy? What of them?"
Seldon said, "Worlds and people would continue, I presume."
"Dont you feel any serious need of probing the possible conditions under which they would continue to exist."
"One would assume they would exist much as they do now."
"One would assume. But could one know by this art of prediction that you speak of?"
"Psychohistory is what I call it. In theory, one could."
"And you feel no pressure to turn that theory into practice."
"I would love to, Hummin, but the desire to do so doesnt automatically manufacture the ability to do so. I told the Emperor that psychohistory could not be turned into a practical technique and I am forced to tell you the same thing."
"And you have no intention of even trying to find the technique?"
"No, I dont, any more than I would feel I ought to try to tackle a pile of pebbles the size of Trantor, count them one by one, and arrange them in order of decreasing mass. I would know it was not something I could accomplish in a lifetime and I would not be fool enough to make a pretense of trying."
"Would you try if you knew the truth about humanitys situation?"
"Thats an impossible question. What is the truth about humanitys situation? Do you claim to know it?"
"Yes, I do. And in five words." Hummins eyes faced forward again, turning briefly toward the blank changelessness of the tunnel as it pushed toward them, expanding until it passed and then dwindling as it slipped away. He then spoke those five words grimly.
He said, "The Galactic Empire is dying."
University
STREELING UNIVERSITY-- ... An institution of higher learning in the Streeling Sector of ancient Trantor ... Despite all these claims to fame in the fields of the humanities and sciences alike, it is not for those that the University looms large in todays consciousness. It would probably have come as a total surprise to the generations of scholars at the University to know that in later times Streeling University would be most remembered because a certain Hari Seldon, during the period of The Flight, had been in residence there for a short time.
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

第十章
　　在飞车出租站，谢顿尽量让自己看来毫不起眼，结果发现实在很难。想要刻意做到不引人注目——行动躲躲藏藏、对所有经过的人别过脸，还要仔细研究某一辆车——一定反而吸引他人的注意。他真要正需要做的，只是采取一种单纯的正常态度。
可是什么才算正常呢？身上的衣服让他觉得不舒服，这种衣服没有任何口袋，所以两只手没地方放。腰际两侧皮带上垂挂的两个袋囊，走动时不断撞到他的身上，使他心神涣散，总以为有人在旁边推他。
他试着去欣赏路过的女子。她们都没有那种袋囊，至少没有垂挂在外面。不过她们带着一种类似小盒子的东西，有些人将它粘在臀部一侧。谢顿看不出它是靠什么粘上去的，也许（他判断）是靠一种类磁性装置。她们的服装并不特别暴露，这点令他有些遗憾。此外，没有任何人穿着稍微低胸的衣服，虽然有些服饰的设计似乎刻意强调臀部曲线。
与此同时，夫铭很有效率地办完一切手续。他付了足够的信用点，换来一张超导陶片，那是启动某辆出租飞车用的。
夫铭说：“上去吧，谢顿。”他一面说，一面指着一辆小型双座飞车。
谢顿问道：“你需要签名吗，夫铭？”
“当然不用，这里的人认识我，不会坚持那些繁文缛节。”
“他们认为你在做什么呢？”
“他们没问，我也没主动说明。”他把陶片插进去。当出租飞车发动时，谢顿感到一阵轻微的振动。
“我们要往D—t飞去。”夫铭打开话匣子。
谢顿不知道D—t是什么，但他猜想应该是指某种路线或类似的意思。
出租飞车在其他地面车之间钻来钻去，最后终于超越那些车辆，来到一条平滑的斜坡路。然后飞车逐渐加速，在一阵颠簸中腾空而起。
谢顿先前已被一组网状安全带罩住，此时觉得有一股力量先将自己向下推向座位，然后又向上抵住那张网。
他说：“感觉不像是反重力。”
“没错。”夫铭说，“这是小型的喷汽作用力，刚好足够将我们推进隧道。”
此时出现在他们面前的，是一座看来像是断崖的结构，上面有许多类似洞穴的开口，远看很像是个国际象棋棋盘。夫铭一路闪避那些飞向其他隧道的出租飞车，驾着他们的飞车向D—1入口飞去。
“你这样很容易撞毁。”谢顿清了清喉咙才说。
“假如一切全依赖我的感觉和反应，那么或许会，不过这辆出租飞车已完全电脑化，计算机可以轻易取代我来操纵。其他的出租飞车也一样——我们要进去啦。”
他们滑进D—t隧道，就像是被它吸了进去。光线不再像外面广场中那般明亮，变成较温暖、较柔和的黄色色调。
夫铭双手离开控制板，将身子向后仰。他深深吸了一口气，然后说：“好啦，我们已经成功闯过一关。刚才在车站时，我们可能被拦下来；在这里面，我们则相当安全。”
飞车一路平稳地向前行驶，隧道内壁不断迅速向后掠去。沿途几乎完全寂静无声，只有飞车加速时发出的稳定轻柔的呼呼声。
“我们的车速多少？”谢顿问道。
夫铭很快瞥了一眼控制板：“时速三百五十公里。”
“磁力推进吗？”
“没错。你们赫利肯也有吧，我猜。”
“是的，是有一条。我从来没搭过，虽然一直想试试看。我想应该不会像这个样子。”
“我确定不会一样。像这样的隧道，川陀总共有好几千公里，像蚂蚁洞那样在地底钻来钻去，还有好些蔓延到较浅的海底。这是我们长途旅行最主要的路径。”
“我们要走多久？”
“到我们真正的目的地？五小时多一点。”
“五小时！”谢顿心都凉了。
“别担心，我们差不多每二十分钟会经过一处休息区，可以在那些地方停下来，将车子驶出隧道，伸伸腿，吃点东西，或是解个手。当然，我希望休息的次数越少越好。”
他们在沉默中继续前进，过了一会儿，右方出现一道强光，前后持续好几秒钟，令谢顿大吃一惊。刹那间，他以为自己看到两辆出租飞车。
“那就是休息区。”夫铭回答了谢顿未曾出口的问题。
谢顿说：“不论你是要带我到什么地方，我在那里真会安全吗？”
夫铭说：“就帝国军警的任何公开活动而言，你都会相当安全。当然啦，至于单独行动的人员——间谍、特务、职业杀手。我们必须时刻提防。自然，我会帮你找个保镖。”
谢顿感到相当不安：“职业杀手！你不是开玩笑吧？他们真会杀我吗？”
夫铭说：“我确定丹莫茨尔不会。据我猜想，他想利用你胜过想杀你。然而也许会有其他敌人出现，或者可能发生一连串不幸事件。你不能永远像梦游一样过日子。”
谢顿摇了摇头，将脸别过去。想想看，只不过四十八小时之前，他还是个无足轻重、几乎无人知晓的外星数学家，只想在离开川陀前观光游览一番，以乡下眼光看看这个伟大世界的雄壮景观。而如今，情势终于明朗：他是帝国军警追捕的一名要犯。想到这种无比险恶的情势，他突然发起抖来。
“那么你呢，你现在又在做什么？”
犬铭若有所思地说：“嗯，他们不会对我仁慈，我想。可能有个神秘而永远逍遥法外的凶手，会将我的头颅劈成两半，或者将我的胸膛炸开。”
夫铭的声音没有丝毫颤抖，冷静的表情完全没有变化，但谢顿却不禁动容。
谢顿说：“我也晓得你会料到这种事可能发生在你身上，但你看来好像……一点也不在乎。”
“我是个老川陀，我对这颗行星的了解不输于任何人。我认识很多朋友，有许多还欠我人情。我总认为自己很精明，并不容易让人智取。简单地说，谢顿，我十分有信心，相信我能照顾自己。”
“夫铭，我很高兴你有这种感觉，希望你这么想是有根据的。但我怎么也想不通，你究竟为什么要冒这个险。我对你有什么意义？为了一个陌生人，即使一点点风险也不值得啊。”
夫铭全神贯注地检查了一下控制板，然后与谢顿正面相对，双眼显得坚定而认真。
“我想要搭救你的原因，和皇上想利用你的原因一样——为了你有预测未来的能力。”
谢顿瞬间感到极度的失望与痛心。原来自己根本不是被人搭救，他只不过是个无助的猎物，被众多猎食者竞相争逐。他气呼呼地说：“我再也不能像在十年会议上发表论文之前那样，我把自己的一生毁了。”
“不，别急着下结论，数学家。皇上和他的官员想得到你的原因只有一个，那就是让他们自己活得更安全。他们之所以对你的能力有兴趣，只是因为或许能用它来扶助皇上的统治，确保他的幼子将来得以继位，以及维系文武百官的地位和权势。反之，我则是为了整个银河系着想。”
“这两者有差别吗？”
夫铭严肃地皱了一下眉头，然后答道：“假如你无法看出这两者的差别，那是你自己的羞耻。早在当今皇上出现之前，早在他所代表的皇朝出现之前，早在帝国本身出现之前，人类便已存在于银河各个角落。人类的历史比帝国久远许多，甚至可能比银河系两千五百万个世界的历史还要久远。根据传说，人类曾有一段时期全部住在一个世界上。”
“传说！”谢顿耸了耸肩。
“是的，传说。但我找不到这并非事实的理由，我是指两万年甚至更久以前。我敢说人类刚出现的时候，没有与生俱来的完整超空间旅行知识。不用说，过去一定曾有一段时间，人们无法以超光速旅行，当时他们必定被禁锢在一颗行星上。而我们若是展望未来，在你死去之后，在当今皇上驾崩之后，在他的整个世系结束之后，甚至在帝国政体瓦解之后，银河中各世界的人类当然仍会继续存在。由这一点看来，过度关切个人、皇上以及年幼的皇太子并无意义，甚至整个帝国的结构也没什么值得关心的。存在于银河中的万兆人口呢？他们又如何？”
谢顿说：“各个世界和人类都将继续存在，我这么想。”
“你难道不觉得有急切的需要，想要探知在何种条件下，这两者才得以继续存在？”
“我会假设两者的处境将和现在很接近。”
“你会假设，但能否用你提到的那种预测未来的技艺弄清楚？”
“我管它叫心理史学。理论上，这是有可能的。”
“你并未感受到将理论变成实际的迫切需求。”
“我很想这样做，夫铭，可是这种渴望无法自动产生能力。我曾经告诉皇上，心理史学不可能转变成一个实用科技，我不得不以同样的答案回答你。”
“难道你连试一试、找一找的意图都没有？”
“没有，我没有，正如我不会试图整理一堆和川陀一样大的鹅卵石，将它们一一计数，再按照质量的大小排列起来。我明白这种事不是我这辈子能完成的，我不会傻到假装要试试看。”
“假如你明白人类目前处境的真相，你会不会想试一试？”
“这是个不可能的问题。什么是人类目前处境的真相？你是说你知道吗？”
“是的，我知道，几个字就能形容。”夫铭的眼睛再度望向前方，单调而毫无变化的隧道迎面而来，在接近车身时显得越来越大，穿过之后又渐渐缩小。然后，他绷着脸说出了那几个字。
Chapter 11

Hari Seldon remained uncomfortably silent for a while after Hummins quiet statement. He shrank within himself in sudden recognition of his own deficiencies.
He had invented a new science: psychohistory. He had extended the laws of probability in a very subtle manner to take into account new complexities and uncertainties and had ended up with elegant equations in innumerable unknowns.
Possibly an infinite number; he couldnt tell.
But it was a mathematical game and nothing more. He had psychohistory--or at least the basis of psychohistory but only as a mathematical curiosity. Where was the historical knowledge that could perhaps give some meaning to the empty equations?
He had none. He had never been interested in history. He knew the outline of Heliconian history. Courses in that small fragment of the human story had, of course, been compulsory in the Heliconian schools. But what was there beyond that? Surely what else he had picked up was merely the bare skeletons that everyone gathered--half legend, the other half surely distorted. Still, how could one say that the Galactic Empire was dying? It had existed for ten thousand years as an accepted Empire and even before that, Trantor, as the capital of the dominating kingdom, had held what was a virtual empire for two thousand years. The Empire had survived the early centuries when whole sections of the Galaxy would now and then refuse to accept the end of their local independence. It had survived the vicissitudes that went with the occasional rebellions, the dynastic wars, some serious periods of breakdown. Most worlds had scarcely been troubled by such things and Trantor itself had grown steadily until it was the worldwide human habitation that now called itself the Eternal World.
To be sure, in the last four centuries, turmoil had increased somehow and there had been a rash of Imperial assassinations and takeovers. But even that was calming down and right now the Galaxy was as quiet as it had ever been. Under Cleon I and before him under his father, Stanel VI, the worlds were prosperous--and Cleon himself was not considered a tyrant. Even those who disliked the Imperium as an institution rarely had anything truly bad to say about Cleon, much as they might inveigh against Eto Demerzel. Why, then, should Hummin say that the Galactic Empire was dying--and with such conviction?
Hummin was a journalist. He probably knew Galactic history in some detail and he had to understand the current situation in great detail. Was it this that supplied him with the knowledge that lay behind his statement? In that case, just what was the knowledge?
Several times Seldon was on the point of asking, of demanding an answer, but there was something in Hummins solemn face that stopped him. And there was something in his own ingrained belief that the Galactic Empire was a given, an axiom, the foundation stone on which all argument rested that prevented him too. After all, if that was wrong, he didnt want to know. No, he couldnt believe that he was wrong. The Galactic Empire could no more come to an end than the Universe itself could. Or, if the Universe did end, then--and only then--would the Empire end.
Seldon closed his eyes, attempting to sleep but, of course, he could not. Would he have to study the history of the Universe in order to advance his theory of psychohistory?
How could he? Twenty-five million worlds existed, each with its own endlessly complex history. How could he study all that? There were book-films in many volumes, he knew, that dealt with Galactic history. He had even skimmed one once for some now-forgotten reason and had found it too dull to view even halfway through.
The book-films had dealt with important worlds. With some, it dealt through all or almost all their history; with others, only as they gained importance for a time and only till they faded away. He remembered having looked up Helicon in the index and having found only one citation. He had punched the keys that would turn up that citation and found Helicon included in a listing of worlds which, on one occasion, had temporarily lined up behind a certain claimant to the Imperial throne who had failed to make good his claim. Helicon had escaped retribution on that occasion, probably because it was not even sufficiently important to be punished.
What good was such a history? Surely, psychohistory would have to take into account the actions and reactions and interactions of each world--each and every world. How could one study the history of twenty-five million worlds and consider all their possible interactions? It would surely be an impossible task and this was just one more reinforcement of the general conclusion that psychohistory was of theoretical interest but could never be put to any practical use. Seldon felt a gentle push forward and decided that the air-taxi must be decelerating.
"Whats up?" he asked.
"I think weve come far enough," said Hummin, "to risk a small stopover for a bite to eat, a glass of something or other, and a visit to a washroom."
And, in the course of the next fifteen minutes, during which the air-taxi slowed steadily, they came to a lighted recess. The taxi swerved inward and found a parking spot among five or six other vehicles.
第十一章
第三部 大学
川陀大学：……位于古川陀斯璀琳区的一所高等学府……虽在人文与科学领域皆颇享盛名，但使该校名声流传至今的并非这些成就。历代任职该校的学者们若是知道，川陀大学在后人心目中之所以占有一席之地，是因为某位名叫哈里•谢顿的人，于“逃亡期”曾在那里暂住过一段时间。他们一定会惊讶不已。
——《银河百科全书》


第十一章
夫铭沉稳地说出那句话之后，哈里•谢顿保持了一段不安的沉默。他突然认清楚自己的弱点，这使他羞愧得无地自容。
他发明了一种崭新的科学——心理史学。他以极精妙的方式将几率法则扩展，以便处理新的复杂度与不准性，最后得到一组优美的方程式。这组方程式有数不清的变量——可能有无穷多，不过他无从判断。
但它只是一种数学游戏，除此之外一无是处。
他拥有了心理史学，至少是心理史学的基础，但它只能算是个数学珍玩。有可能赋予这些空洞方程式一些意义的历史知识又在哪里？
他一窍不通，他对历史从来没兴趣。他只知道赫利肯历史的大纲，在赫利肯的各级学校，这一小部分的人类历史当然是必修课程。可是除此之外呢？他所吸收的其他历史知识，无疑只是人云亦云的皮毛梗概——半是传说，另一半显然也遭到扭曲。
尽管如此，又怎能说银河帝国即将灭亡？它成为举世公认的帝国已有一万年的历史，甚至在此之前，还有二千年的时间，川陀身为雄霸一方王国的国都，也等于领导了一个帝国。在帝国最初几世纪间，银河各区不时出现拒绝失去独立地位的反抗，最后帝国终究安然度过这个瓶颈。至于偶尔发生的叛变、改朝换代的战争，以及一些严重崩溃期所带来的起伏，帝国也都一一克服。答多数世界几乎未曾受到这些问题的困扰，川陀本身也不断稳定成长，最后整个世界住满人类，如今则骄傲地自称“永恒世界”。
无可讳言，在过去四个世纪中，动乱似乎有增无减，行刺皇帝与篡位行为如同儿戏。但那些动荡也已渐渐平息，今日的银河又恢复以往的太平岁月。在克里昂一世，以及在此之前，在他的父亲斯达涅尔五世统治之下，所有世界欣欣向荣。克里昂本人从未被视为暴君，即使那些不喜欢帝制的人，虽然常常痛骂伊图•丹莫茨尔，对克里昂也鲜有真正的恶评。
那么，为何夫铭竟然说银河帝国即将灭亡，而且说得这么斩钉截铁？
夫铭是个新闻记者，他或许对银河历史有些认识，而且，必须对当今情势充分了解。是否因为如此，使他有足够的知识作这个论断的后盾？若是这样，那些知识又是什么？
谢顿好几次想发问，想求得一个答案，但夫铭严肃的表情使他欲言又止。而阻止他发问的另一个原因，是他自己有个根深蒂固的想法，认为银河帝国是一个前提、一个公设、一个基石，所有的论证都植基其上。无论如何，假如“它”是错的，自己也不愿知道。
不，他不能相信自己错了。银河帝国就像宇宙一样不会毁灭，或者应该说，假若有一天宇宙真毁灭了，唯有在那种情况下，帝国才会跟着陪葬。
谢顿闭上眼睛，试着小睡片刻，可是无法入眠。难道为了推展他的心理史学理论，他得研究整个宇宙的历史吗？
他又如何办得到呢？二千五百万个世界，每个都有自己无限复杂的历史，他怎么研究得完？他知道，讨论银河历史的胶卷书汗牛充栋，他甚至曾经浏览过其中一本，原因他自己也忘了，结果他发现内容实在太过沉闷，连一半也无法读完。
那些胶卷书讨论的都是重要的世界。某些世界的历史全部或几乎全部皆有记载，某些则只有它们兴起与没落之间的历史。他记得曾在索引中查过赫利肯，发现只有一处提到它。于是他按下几个键，查看那一部分的内容，结果看到赫利肯与其他一些世界并列在一张名单上。原来在某段短暂的时期，这些世界曾支持一个声称拥有皇位继承权的人，不过那人最后并未成功。赫利肯未因那次事件遭到惩处，或许因为它太过微不足道，连受罚的资格都没有。
这种历史有什么用呢？当然，心理史学必须考虑每个世界的行动与反应，以及彼此之间的互动——大大小小每一个世界。一个人如何能研究二千五百万个世界的历史，并考虑其间各种可能的互动关系？那无疑是个不可能的工作，而这更强化了谢顿的结论：心理史学只有理论上的价值，绝对不可能有任何实用性。
此时，谢顿感到一股向前的微弱推力，判断一定是出租飞车正在减速。
“怎么了？”他问。
“我想我们走得够远了，”夫铭说，“不妨冒险稍作停留，吃些东西，喝点什么，同时找一下盥洗室。”
接下来的十五分钟，出租飞车平稳地逐渐减速，最后来到一处灯火通明的壁凹。飞车立刻钻进去，在五六辆车子之间找到一个停车位。

Chapter 12
Hummins practiced eye seemed to take in the recess, the other taxis, the diner, the walkways, and the men and women all at a glance. Seldon, trying to look inconspicuous and again not knowing how, watched him, trying not to do so too intently.
When they sat down at a small table and punched in their orders, Seldon, attempting to sound indifferent, said, "Everything okay?"
"Seems so," said Hummin.
"How can you tell?"
Hummin let his dark eyes rest on Seldon for a moment. "Instinct," he said. "Years of news gathering. You look and know, No news here. "
Seldon nodded and felt relieved. Hummin might have said it sardonically, but there must be a certain amount of truth to it. His satisfaction did not last through the first bite of his sandwich. He looked up at Hummin with his mouth full and with a look of hurt surprise on his face.
Hummin said, "This is a wayside diner, my friend. Cheap, fast, and not very good. The foods homegrown and has an infusion of rather sharp yeast. Trantorian palates are used to it."
Seldon swallowed with difficulty. "But back in the hotel--"
"You were in the Imperial Sector, Seldon. Food is imported there and where microfood is used it is high-quality. It is also expensive."
Seldon wondered whether to take another bite. "You mean that as long as I stay on Trantor--"
Hummin made a hushing motion with his lips. "Dont give anyone the impression that youre used to better. There are places on Trantor where to be identified as an aristocrat is worse than being identified as an Outworlder. The food wont be so bad everywhere, I assure you. These wayside places have a reputation for low quality. If you can stomach that sandwich, youll be able to eat anywhere on Trantor. And it wont hurt you. Its not decayed or bad or anything like that. It just has a harsh, strong taste and, honestly, you may grow accustomed to it. Ive met Trantorians who spit out honest food and say it lacks that homegrown tang."
"Do they grow much food on Trantor?" asked Seldon. A quick side glance showed him there was no one seated in the immediate vicinity and he spoke quietly. "Ive always heard it takes twenty surrounding worlds to supply the hundreds of freight ships required to feed Trantor every day."
"I know. And hundreds to carry off the load of wastes. And if you want to make the story really good, you say that the same freight ships carry food one way and waste the other. Its true that we import considerable quantities of food, but thats mostly luxury items. And we export considerable waste, carefully treated into inoffensiveness, as important organic fertilizer--every bit as important to other worlds as the food is to us. But thats only a small fraction of the whole."
"It is?"
"Yes. In addition to fish in the sea, there are gardens and truck farms everywhere. And fruit trees and poultry and rabbits and vast microorganism farms--usually called yeast farms, though the yeast makes up a minority of the growths. And our wastes are mostly used right here at home to maintain all that growth. In fact, in many ways Trantor is very much like an enormous and overgrown space settlement. Have you ever visited one of those?"
"Indeed I have."
"Space settlements are essentially enclosed cities, with everything artificially cycled, with artificial ventilation, artificial day and night, and so on. Trantor is different only in that even the largest space settlement has a population of only ten million and Trantor has four thousand times that. Of course, we have real gravity. And no space settlement can match us in our microfoods. We have yeast vats, fungal vats, and algae ponds vast beyond the imagination. And we are strong on artificial flavoring, added with no light hand. Thats what gives the taste to what youre eating."
Seldon had gotten through most of his sandwich and found it not as offensive as the first bite had been. "And it wont affect me?"
"It does hit the intestinal flora and every once in a while it afflicts some poor Outworlder with diarrhea, but thats rare, and you harden even to that quickly. Still, drink your milkshake, which you probably wont like. It contains an antidiarrhetic that should keep you safe, even if you tend to be sensitive to such things."
Seldon said querulously, "Dont talk about it, Hummin. A person can be suggestible to such things."
"Finish the milkshake and forget the suggestibility."
They finished the rest of their meal in silence and soon were on their way again.
第十二章
　　夫铭老练的眼睛似乎只瞥了一眼，便将整个环境、其他出租车辆、进餐的众人、各个回廊走道，以及附近的男男女女都一览无遗。谢顿一心想要显得毫不起眼，却不知该怎么做，只好专心望着夫铭，尽量不表现得太过好奇。
他们在一张小桌旁坐下来，按下点菜键之后，谢顿试着以不在乎的口气说：“一切都还好吧？”
“似乎如此。”夫铭说。
“你又怎么知道？”
夫铭用一双黑眼珠瞪了谢顿一会儿。“直觉，”他说，“跑了许多年新闻，只消看一眼就知道‘这里没新闻’。”
谢顿点了点头，感到如释重负。夫铭的说法或许带有几分讥嘲，可是多少一定有些真实性。
这种心满意足的感觉并未持续多久，在他咬下第一口三明治时便告结束。他抬起头望向夫铭，满嘴是无法下咽的食物，脸上带着一种惊愕的表情。
夫铭说：“这是路边快餐店，我的朋友。便宜、快速，而且不怎么可口。这些食物都是土产，还加了气味强烈的酵母，川陀人的嘴巴习惯这种口味。”
跚顿硬着头皮吞下去：“可是在旅馆……”
“那时你在皇区，谢顿。那里的食物是进口的，使用的微生食品都是高级品，而且非常昂贵。”
谢顿不知道该不该再咬一口。“你的意思是说，只要我待在川陀……”
夫铭用嘴唇做了一个禁声的动作：“别让任何人觉得你吃惯了较佳的食物。在川陀的某些地方，被认作贵族比被当成外星人士还糟。不是每个地力的食物都这么难吃，我向你保证。这些路边摊一向以质量低劣闻名，假如你咽得下这些三明治，川陀任何角落的东西你都能吃。何况它对你没有害处，它并未腐烂、变坏或发生诸如此类的变化，只不过有一种刺激强烈的口味。而且老实说，你会慢慢习惯的。我曾经遇到一些川陀人，他们对纯正食物小屑一顾，认为那种食物缺乏土产的特有风味。”
“川陀生产的食物很多吗？”谢顿问道。他向左右迅速瞄一眼，确定附近都没坐人，才以平静的口气说：“我总是听说每天有数百艘太空货船为川陀运送粮食，这些粮食需要周围二十个世界共同供应。”
“我知道，此外还需要数百艘货船将垃圾运走。你若想让这个传闻听来更加刺激，就该说同一艘货船承运粮食，回程则载走一堆垃圾。我们进口大量食物是真有其事，但那些大多是奢侈品。我们也的确出口可观的垃圾，它们都经过仔细处理，对人体不再有害，反而是一种重要的有机肥料。那些垃圾对其他世界而言，就像食物对我们一样重要。可是，那只不过是一小部分而已。”
“是吗？”
“是的。川陀除了海中的渔产，各地还有蔬菜农场。此外更有果树园、家禽、兔子，以及庞大的微生农场——通常称为酵母农场，不过酵母只占作物总量的少数。我们的垃圾主要用在本地，用来维持作物的生长所需。事实上在许多方面，川陀都非常像一座巨大而人口过多的太空殖民地，你曾经到过这类地方吗？”
“去过。”
“太空殖民地基本上是密封的城市，万事万物都是人工循环，例如人工通风、人工昼夜等。川陀不同之处仅在于人口的数量，即使最大的太空殖民地，人口也只有一千万，川陀的人口却是这个数目的四千倍。当然，我们有真正的重力，而且没有任何太空殖民地的微生食品能和我们相比。我们有大到无法想象的酵母培养桶、真菌培养垫和藻类培养池。此外我们精于人工香料，添加时绝无保留，你吃到的那种特殊口味便是这么来的。”
谢顿差不多解决了那份三明治，发觉它已不再像第一口那么难吃。“它不会害我生病吧？”
“它的确会伤到肠内微生物，偶尔也会害得一些可怜的外星人士腹泻，不过那些情况都很罕见，而且即使如此，你也很快会有抵抗力。话说回来，还是把你的奶昔喝掉，虽然你也许不会喜欢。它含有止泻的成分，即使你对这些东西容易过敏，它应该也能保你安然无恙。”
谢顿不悦地说：“别再说了，夫铭，这种事很容易说说就变成真的了。”
“那就当我没说，喝完你的奶昔吧。”
他们默默把剩下的食物吃完，不久便上路了。
Chapter 13

They were now racing rapidly through the tunnel once more. Seldon decided to give voice to the question that had been nagging at him for the last hour or so.
"Why do you say the Galactic Empire is dying?"
Hummin turned to look at Seldon again. "As a journalist, I have statistics poured into me from all sides till theyre squeezing out of my ears. And Im allowed to publish very little of it. Trantors population is decreasing. Twenty-five years ago, it stood at almost forty-five billion. "Partly, this decrease is because of a decline in the birthrate. To be sure, Trantor never has had a high birthrate. If youll look about you when youre traveling on Trantor, you wont encounter very many children, considering the enormous population. But just the same its declining. Then too there is emigration. People are leaving Trantor in greater numbers than are arriving."
"Considering its large population," said Seldon, "thats not surprising."
"But its unusual just the same because it hasnt happened before. Again, all over the Galaxy trade is stagnating. People think that because there are no rebellions at the moment and because things are quiet that all is well and that the difficulties of the past few centuries are over. However, political infighting, rebellions, and unrest are all signs of a certain vitality too. But now theres a general weariness. Its quiet, not because people are satisfied and prosperous, but because theyre tired and have given up."
"Oh, I dont know," said Seldon dubiously.
"I do. And the antigrav phenomenon weve talked about is another case in point. We have a few gravitic lifts in operation, but new ones arent being constructed. Its an unprofitable venture and there seems no interest in trying to make it profitable. The rate of technological advance has been slowing for centuries and is down to a crawl now. In some cases, it has stopped altogether. Isnt this something youve noticed? After all, youre a mathematician."
"I cant say Ive given the matter any thought."
"No one does. Its accepted. Scientists are very good these days at saying that things are impossible, impractical, useless. They condemn any speculation at once. You, for instance--What do you think of psychohistory? It is theoretically interesting, but it is useless in any practical sense. Am I right?"
"Yes and no," said Seldon, annoyed. "It is useless in any practical sense, but not because my sense of adventure has decayed, I assure you. It really it useless."
"That, at least," said Hummin with a trace of sarcasm, "is your impression in this atmosphere of decay in which all the Empire lives."
"This atmosphere of decay," said Seldon angrily, "is your impression. Is it possible that you are wrong?"
Hummin stopped and for a moment appeared thoughtful. Then he said, "Yes, I might be wrong. I am speaking only from intuition, from guesses. What I need is a working technique of psychohistory."
Seldon shrugged and did not take the bait. He said, "I dont have such a technique to give you.--But suppose youre right. Suppose the Empire it running down and will eventually stop and fall apart. The human species will still exist."
"Under what conditions, man? For nearly twelve thousand years, Trantor, under strong rulers, has largely kept the peace. Thereve been interruptions to that--rebellions, localized civil wars, tragedy in plenty--but, on the whole and over large areas, there has been peace. Why is Helicon so pro-Imperium? Your world, I mean. Because it is small and would be devoured by its neighbors were it not that the Empire keeps it secure."
"Are you predicting universal war and anarchy if the Empire fails?"
"Of course. Im not fond of the Emperor oooof the Imperial institutions in general, but I dont have any substitute for it. I dont know what else will keep the peace and Im not ready to let go until I have something else in hand."
Seldon said, "You talk as though you are in control of the Galaxy. You are not ready to let go? You must have something else in hand? Who are you to talk so?"
"Im speaking generally, figuratively," said Hummin. "Im not worried about Chetter Hummin personally. It might be said that the Empire will last my time; it might even show signs of improvement in my time. Declines dont follow a straight-line path. It may be a thousand years before the final crash and you might well imagine I would be dead then and, certainly, I will leave no descendants. As far as women are concerned, I have nothing but the occasional casual attachment and I have no children and intend to have none. I have given no hostages to fortune.--I looked you up after your talk, Seldon. You have no children either."
"I have parents and two brothers, but no children." He smiled rather weakly. "I was very attached to a woman at one time, but it seemed to her that I was attached more to my mathematics."
"Were you?"
"It didnt seem so to me, but it seemed so to her. So she left."
"And you have had no one since?"
"No. I remember the pain too clearly as yet."
"Well then, it might seem we could both wait out the matter and leave it to other people, well after our time, to suffer. I might have been willing to accept that earlier, but no longer. For now I have a tool; I am in command."
"Whats your tool?" asked Seldon, already knowing the answer.
"You!" said Hummin.
And because Seldon had known what Hummin would say, he wasted no time in being shocked or astonished. He simply shook his head and said, "You are quite wrong. I am no tool fit for use."
"Why not?"
Seldon sighed. "How often must I repeat it? Psychohistory is not a practical study. The difficulty is fundamental. All the space and time of the Universe would not suffice to work out the necessary problems."
"Are you certain of that?"
"Unfortunately, yes."
"Theres no question of your working out the entire future of the Galactic Empire, you know. You neednt trace out in detail the workings of every human being or even of every world. There are merely terrain questions you must answer: Will the Galactic Empire crash and, if so, when? What will be the condition of humanity afterward? Can anything be done to prevent the crash or to ameliorate conditions afterward? These are comparatively simple questions, it seems to me."
Seldon shook his head and smiled sadly. "The history of mathematics is full of simple questions that had only the most complicated of answers--or none at all."
"Is there nothing to be done? I can see that the Empire is falling, but I cant prove it. All my conclusions are subjective and I cannot show that I am not mistaken. Because the view is a seriously unsettling one, people would prefer not to believe my subjective conclusion and nothing will be done to prevent the Fall or even to cushion it. You could prove the coming Fall or, for that matter, disprove it."
"But that is exactly what I cannot do. I cant find you proof where none exists. I cant make a mathematical system practical when it isnt. I cant find you two even numbers that will yield an odd number as a sum, no matter how vitally your all the Galaxy--may need that odd number."
Hummin said, "Well then, youre part of the decay. Youre ready to accept failure."
"What choice have I?"
"Cant you try? However useless the effort may seem to you to be, have you anything better to do with your life? Have you some worthier goal? Have you a purpose that will justify you in your own eyes to some greater extent?" Seldons eyes blinked rapidly. "Millions of worlds. Billions of cultures. Quadrillions of people. Decillions of interrelationships.--And you want me to reduce it to order."
"No, I want you to try. For the sake of those millions of worlds, billions of cultures, and quadrillions of people. Not for the Emperor. Not for Demerzel. For humanity."
"I will fail," said Seldon.
"Then we will be no worse off. Will you try?"
And against his will and not knowing why, Seldon heard himself say, "I will try."
And the course of his life was set.
第十三章
　　他们再度在隧道中风驰电掣。那个在心中鼓噪了一小时的问题，谢顿决定让它化为真正的声音。
“你为什么说银河帝国即将灭亡？”
夫铭转头望向谢顿：“身为一名新闻记者，各种统计资料从四面八方向我涌来，直到溢出我的耳朵为止。而我获准能发表的，只是其中极少一部分。川陀的人口正在锐减，二十年前它几乎有四百五十亿人。
“这种现象部分是由于出生率的降低。事实下，川陀的出生率一向不高。当你在川陀四处旅行时，如果仔细注意一下，便会发现路上没有太多儿童，和庞大的人口简直不成比例。即使不考虑这一点，人口仍旧逐年锐减。此外还有移民的因素，移出川陀的人比移入的多得多。”
“既然它有如此众多的人口，”谢顿说，“这也就不足为奇。”
“但这仍是不寻常的现象，因为以前从末发生过这种事。再者，整个银河的贸易都呈现停滞状态。人们认为这是因为目前没有任何叛乱，因为一切都很平静，天下太平了，数世纪的困苦已成过去。然而政治斗争、叛乱活动，以及不安的局势，其实也是某种活力的象征；如今却是一种全面性的疲乏状态。表面下的确平静，但这并非由于人们真正满足，或是社会真正繁荣，而是凶为他们感到疲倦，已经死心了。”
“哦，我并不清楚。”谢顿以怀疑的口吻说。
“我很清楚。我们刚才淡到的反重力设施，就是另一个贴切的例子。我们目前有几座运作中的熏力升降机，可是没有再造新的。它是一种无利可图的投资，而且，似乎没人有兴趣试图把它转亏为盈。过去数世纪以来，科技进展的速率不断减缓，如今则是有如牛步；在某些方面，已经完全不再进步。你是个数学家，你难道没有注意到这种事吗？”
“我不敢说曾思考过这种问题。”
“没有人思考过，大家都视为理所当然。这年头的科学家．动不动就喜欢说这个不可能，那个不实用或没有用。对于任何深刻的反省，他们总是立刻加以否定。就拿你做例子，你对心理史学持什么看法——它有理论上的价值，却没有任何实用性，我说得对不对？”
“也对也不对。”谢顿以厌烦的口气答道。“就实用性而言，它的确没有用处，但是我向你保证，这并非由于我的冒险精神式微。事实上，它的的确确没有用处。”
“至少这一点，”夫铭带着几分讥嘲说，“是你身处整个帝国的衰败气氛下所产生的印象。”
“这种衰败的气氛，”谢顿气呼呼地说，“是你自己的印象。有没有可能是你自己弄错了？’，夫铭并未立刻回答，看来陷入了沉思。一会儿之后，他才开口说：“是的，我有可能弄错。我只是根据直觉，根据猜测束下断语，我需要的是心理史学这种实用的科技。”
谢顿耸了耸肩，没将这个饵吞下去。他说：“我没有这样的科技能提供给你。但假设你是对的，假设帝国的确在走下坡路，最后终将消失，变得四分五裂。可是那个时候，全体人类仍将存在。”
“在什么情形，老兄？过去近一万两千年来，在强势领导者的统治之下，川陀大致能维持一个和平局面。过去也有过一些动荡——叛变、局部内战，以及众多的天灾人祸——然而就整体而言，就宏观而言，天下仍算是太平。为什么赫利肯如此拥护帝政？我是指你的世界。因为它很小，要不是帝国维护它的安全，它就会被邻近世界吞掉。”
“你是预测如果帝国崩溃，将会出现全面性战争和无政府状态？”
“当然，一般说来，我并不喜欢这位皇上和这种帝制，可是我没有任何取代方案。我不知道还有什么能维系和平，在我掌握其他方案之前，我还不准备放手。”
谢顿说：“你说得好像银河掌握在你手中似的。你还不准备放手？你必须掌握其他方案？你以为你是什么人？”
“我这是一般性、譬喻性的说法。”夫铭说，“我并不担心契特•夫铭这个人。也许可以说，在我死后帝国仍将继续存在；而且在我有生之年，它甚至可能显现进步的迹象。衰微并非沿着一条直线前前进，或许还要好几千年的时间，帝国才会完全瓦解。你一定可以想象，那时我早就死了，而且，我不会留下子嗣——对于女人，我只是偶尔会动动情，我没有子女，将来也不想要。所以说，我对未来没有任何的个人牵挂——在你演讲之后，我调查过你，谢顿，你也没有任何子女。”
“我双亲俱在，有两个兄弟，但没有小孩。”他露出相当无力的笑容，“过去，我曾对一名女子十分迷恋，但她觉得我对数学的迷恋更深。”
“是吗？”
“我自己不这么觉得，可是她偏要那么想，所以她离开了我。”
“从此你就再也没有其他女伴？”
“没有，那种痛苦至今仍旧刻骨铭心。”
“这么说，似乎我们两人都能袖手旁观，把这个问题留给好几代以后的人去烦恼。以前我或许会愿意这么做，如今却绝对不会。冈为现在我有了工具，我已经能控制局面。”
“你有什么工具？”谢顿问道，其实他已经知道答案。
“你！”夫铭说。
谢顿早就料到夫铭会这么说，因此并未感到震惊或被吓倒。他只是立刻摇了摇头，答道：“你错得太离谱了，我不是什么适用的工具。”
“为何不是？”
谢顿叹了一口莆藓“要我重复多少次？心理史学并非一门实用的学问。它有根本上的困难，整个宇宙的时空也不足以解决必须面对的闷题。”
“你确定吗？”
“很遗憾，正是如此。”
“你可知道，你根本不必推算出银河帝国整个的未来。你不需要追踪每一个人类，甚至每一个世界的活动细节。你必须回答的只有几个问题：银河帝国是否真会瓦解？如果答案是肯定的，那么何时会发生？其后人类的处境如何？有没有任何措施，能够防止帝国瓦解，或是改善其后的处境？相较之下，这些都是相当简单的问题，至少我这么觉得。”
谢顿摇了摇头，露出一抹苦笑：“数学史中有无数简单的问题，它们的答案却再复杂不过，或者根本没有答案。”
“真的束手无策吗？我能看出帝国江河口下，但我无法证实这一点。我的一切结论都是主观的，我不能证明自己没有犯错。由于这个展望令人极度不安，人们宁可不信我的主观结论，因此不会有任何救亡图存的行动，甚至不会试图减轻它的冲击。而你能够证明即将来临的衰亡，或反证那是不可能的。”
“但这正是我无法做到的，我不能帮你找到不存在的证明。一个不切实际的数学系统，我没办法让它变得实用。正如我不能帮你找到加起来是奇数的两个偶数，不论你——或整个银河多么需要那个奇数。”
夫铭说：“这么说的话，你也成了哀败的一环；你已经准备接受失败。”
“我有什么选择？”
“难道你就不能试一试？无论这个努力在你看来多么徒劳无功，你这一生还有什么更好的计划？还有什么更崇高的日标？在你自己的眼中，你有什么更加值得全力以赴的伟大理想？”
谢顿的眼睛迅速眨了几下：“上千万个世界，数十亿种文化，好几万兆的人口，恒河系数的互动关系——你却要我将它约定为秩序。”
“不，我只要你试试看，就为了这上千万个世界。数十亿种文化，以及好几万兆的人口。并非为了皇上，也不是为丹莫茨尔，而是为了全体人类。”
“我会失败。”谢顿说。
“那我们也不会比现在更糟，你愿意试试吗？”
不知道为什么，谢顿竟然听见自己说出违背意愿的一句：“我愿意试试。”他一生的方向，从此确定。
Chapter 14

The journey came to its end and the air-taxi moved into a much larger lot than the one at which they had eaten. (Seldon still remembered the taste of the sandwich and made a wry face.)
Hummin turned in his taxi and came back, placing his credit slip in a small pocket on the inner surface of his shirt. He said, "Youre completely safe here from anything outright and open. This is the Streeling Sector."
"Streeling?"
"Its named for someone who first opened up the area to settlement, I imagine. Most of the sectors are named for someone or other, which means that most of the names are ugly and some are hard to pronounce. Just the same, if you try to have the inhabitants here change Streeling to Sweetsmell or something like that, youll have a fight on your hands."
"Of course," said Seldon, sniffing loudly, "it isnt exactly Sweetsmell."
"Hardly anywhere in Trantor is, but youll get used to it."
"Im glad were here," said Seldon. "Not that I like it, but I got quite tired sitting in the taxi. Getting around Trantor must be a horror. Back on Helicon, we can get from any one place to any other by air, in far less time than it took us to travel less than two thousand kilometers here."
"We have air-jets too."
"But in that case--"
"I could arrange an air-taxi ride more or less anonymously. It would have been much more difficult with an air-jet. And regardless of how safe it is here, Id feel better if Demerzel didnt know exactly where you were.--As a matter of fact, were not done yet. Were going to take the Expressway for the final stage."
Seldon knew the expression. "One of those open monorails moving on an electromagnetic field, right?"
"Right."
"We dont have them on Helicon. Actually, we dont need them there. I rode on an Expressway the first day I was on Trantor. It took me from the airport to the hotel. It was rather a novelty, but if I were to use it all the time, I imagine the noise and crowds would become overpowering."
Hummin looked amused. "Did you get lost?"
"No, the signs were useful. There was trouble getting on and off, but I was helped. Everyone could tell I was an Outworlder by my clothes, I now realize. They seemed eager to help, though; I guess because it was amusing to watching me hesitate and stumble."
"As an expert in Expressway travel by now, you will neither hesitate nor stumble." Hummin said it pleasantly enough, though there was a slight twitch to the corners of his mouth. "Come on, then."
They sauntered leisurely along the walkway, which was lit to the extent one might expect of an overcast day and that brightened now and then as though the sun occasionally broke through the clouds. Automatically, Seldon looked upward to see if that were indeed the case, but the "sky" above was blankly luminous. Hummin saw this and said, "This change in brightness seems too suit the human psyche. There are days when the street seems to be in bright sunlight and days when it is rather darker than it is now."
"But no rain or snow?"
"Or hail or sleet. No. Nor high humidity nor bitter cold. Trantor has its points, Seldon, even now."
There were people walking in both directions and there were a considerable number of young people and also some children accompanying the adults, despite what Hummin had said about the birthrate. All seemed reasonably prosperous and reputable. The two sexes were equally represented and the clothing was distinctly more subdued than it had been in the Imperial Sector. His own costume, as chosen by Hummin, fit right in. Very few were wearing hats and Seldon thankfully removed his own and swung it at his side. There was no deep abyss separating the two sides of the walkway and as Hummin had predicted in the Imperial Sector, they were walking at what seemed to be ground level. There were no vehicles either and Seldon pointed this out to Hummin.
Hummin said, "There are quite a number of them in the Imperial Sector because theyre used by officials. Elsewhere, private vehicles are rare and those that are used have separate tunnels reserved for them. Their use is not really necessary, since we have Expressways and, for shorter distances, moving corridors. For still shorter distances, we have walkways and we can use our legs."
Seldon heard occasional muted sighs and creaks and saw, some distance off, the endless passing of Expressway cars.
"There it is," he said, pointing.
"I know, but let us move on to a boarding station. There are more cars there and it is easier to get on."
Once they were safely ensconced in an Expressway car, Seldon turned to Hummin and said, "What amazes me is how quiet the Expressways are. I realize that they are mass-propelled by an electromagnetic field, but it seems quiet even for that." He listened to the occasional metallic groan as the car they were on shifted against its neighbors.
"Yes, its a marvelous network," said Hummin, "but you dont see it at its peak. When I was younger, it was quieter than it is now and there are those who say that there wasnt as much as a whisper fifty years ago--though I suppose we might make allowance for the idealization of nostalgia."
"Why isnt it that way now?"
"Because it isnt maintained properly. I told you about decay."
Seldon frowned. "Surely, people dont sit around and say, Were decaying. Lets let the Expressways fall apart. "
"No, they dont. Its not a purposeful thing. Bad spots are patched, decrepit coaches refurbished, magnets replaced. However, its done in more slapdash fashion, more carelessly, and at greater intervals. There just arent enough credits available."
"Where have the credits gone?"
"Into other things. Weve had centuries of unrest. The navy is much larger and many times more expensive than it once was. The armed forces are much better-paid, in order to keep them quiet. Unrest, revolts, and minor blazes of civil war all take their toll."
"But its been quiet under Cleon. And weve had fifty years of peace."
"Yes, but soldiers who are well-paid would resent having that pay reduced just because there is peace. Admirals resist mothballing ships and having themselves reduced in rank simply because there is less for them to do. So the credits still go--unproductively--to the armed forces and vital areas of the social good are allowed to deteriorate. Thats what I call decay. Dont you? Dont you think that eventually you would fit that sort of view into your psychohistorical notions?"
Seldon stirred uneasily. Then he said, "Where are we going, by the way?"
"Streeling University."
"Ah, thats why the sectors name was familiar. Ive heard of the University."
"Im not surprised. Trantor has nearly a hundred thousand institutions of higher learning and Streeling is one of the thousand or so at the top of the heap."
"Will I be staying there?"
"For a while. University campuses are unbreathable sanctuaries, by and large. You will be safe there."
"But will I be welcome there?"
"Why not? Its hard to find a good mathematician these days. They might be able to use you. And you might be able to use them too--and for more than just a hiding place."
"You mean, it will be a place where I can develop my notions."
"You have promised," said Hummin gravely.
"I have promised to try, " said Seldon and thought to himself that it was about like promising to try to make a rope out of sand.
第十四章
　　这趟旅程终于结束，出租飞车驶进一处停午场，这里比他们中途休息的地方要大得多。（谢顿仍记得那个三明治的味道，不禁露出一副愁眉苦脸。）
前去归还飞车的夫铭走了回来，将他的信用瓷卡塞进衬衣内层的小口袋中。他说：“你在此地，即使是公然和公开活动，都绝对安全无虞，这里是斯璀璘区。”
“斯璀璘？”
“我猜，它是根据本区首位殖民者的名字命名的，我这么猜。大多数的区都以某人的名字命名，这就表示大多数名字都很难听，而且有些还很难念。话说回来，你若想让此地居民将斯璀璘区改成香甜区或是类似这样的名字，你的麻烦可就大了。”
“当然，”谢顿一面说，一面使劲吸气，“这里并非又香又甜。”
“川陀各个角落几乎都是如此，不过你会渐渐习惯的。”
“真高兴我们到了。”谢顿说，“不是我喜欢这里。而是我实在坐够了那辆飞车。在川陀来来往往一定是可怕的经验，不像在我们赫利肯，从某处到任何一处都能利用空中运输，而且像这种不到两千公里的旅程，绝对不用花这么长的时间。”
“我们也有喷射机。”
“可是既然这样……”
“我可以用几乎匿名的方式安排出租飞车，但是安排喷射机则困难许多。而且不论此地多么安全，如果丹莫茨尔不知道你确实的行踪，我总会比较放心。事实上，这趟旅程并末结束，最后我们还得搭一段磁浮捷运。”
谢顿懂得这个名称：“一种在电磁场上行走的开放式单轨列车，对不对？”
“没错。”
“赫利肯没有这种交通工具，其实，我们那里并不需要？我来到川陀的第一天，就曾搭过一次磁浮捷运，从飞航站前往旅馆。感觉相当新奇，但我若是每天都得搭，一定无法忍受那种噪音和拥挤。”
夫铭看来觉得挺有趣：“你迷路了吗？”
“没有，那些路标很管用。上下车有点麻烦，不过都有人帮我。人家都能从我的服装看出我是外星人士，现在我已经了解这点。然而他们似乎都很热心，我猜是因为看到我迟疑和蹒跚的模样很可笑。”
“如今身为一名磁浮捷运旅行专家，你既不会迟疑，也不会再蹒跚。”夫铭以相当愉悦的口气说，但他的嘴角却微微有些抽动。“那么我们走吧。”
他们沿着人行道悠闲地漫步，沿途的照明让人感到是个阴天。光线偶尔会忽然变亮，仿佛太阳不时从云缝中钻出来。谢顿自然而然抬起头，想看看是否果真如此，但头顶的“天空”却是一团空洞的光明。
夫铭将一切看在眼里：“这种亮度的变化似乎符合人类心理状态。有些日子街道上好像艳阳高照，也有的日子比现在还要暗。”
“但没有雨雪吧？”
“或是冰雹、冰珠？全都没有，此外也没有过高的湿度或刺骨的寒冷。川陀仍有它的优点，谢顿，即使是现在。”
路上的行人来来往往，其中不少是年轻人，还有些成年人带着小孩——虽然夫铭曾说此地出生率很低。所有的人似乎都一副意气风发、有头有脸的样子。两性的比例差不多相等，居民的衣着显然比皇区朴素许多，夫铭帮谢顿选的服装刚好合适。戴帽子的人很少，谢顿乐得摘下帽子。
人行道两旁不再是无底洞般的深渊，正如夫铭在皇区所做的推测，他们似乎是在地面的高度行走。此外路上也见不到车辆，谢顿特别向夫铭指出这一点。
夫铭说：“皇区有相当多的车辆，因为那是官员的交通工具。在其他地方，私人车辆十分罕见，而且都有专用的个别隧道。车辆并非真正必要，因为我们拥有磁浮捷运。至于较短的距离，我们还有活动叫廊；至于更短的距离，我们有人行道，可以利用我们的双腿。”
谢顿听到不时传来一些闷响与嘎嘎声，又看见不远处有许多磁浮捷运车厢不停穿梭。
“在那里。”他一面说，一面指了指。
“我知道，不过让我们去专用车站，那里的车比较多，也比较容易上下。”
等到他们安坐在磁浮捷运车厢内，谢顿便转头对夫铭说：“让我讶异的是磁浮捷运竟然这么安静。我知道它们是靠电磁场推进，但即便如此，似乎还是太安静了。”当他们的车厢与邻车交会时，他仔细倾听偶尔发出的金属低沉噪音。
“是啊，这是个不同凡响的交通网。”夫铭说，“可是你没见过它的巅峰期，当我较年轻的时候，它比现在还要安静。而且有人说，五十年前几乎一点声音也没有——不过我想，我们也该考虑到由于怀旧而造成的理想化。”
“现在为何不是那样？”
“因为缺乏适当的维修，我跟你讲过衰败的趋势。”
谢顿皱了皱眉头：“无论如何，人们总不会坐视不理，只会说：‘我们正在衰败，我们让磁浮捷运四分五裂吧。’”
“不，他们没有那样做，这并非有意造成的。损坏的地方修补过，老旧的车厢更新过，而磁体也曾经更换。然而，这些工作做得太过草率、太过大意，而且时间间隔太长。这都是因为设有足够的信用点。”
“信用点到哪儿去了？”
“用到别的地方去了。我们经历了数世纪的动荡，如今舰队编制比过去庞大，经费是过去的好几倍。武装部队的待遇过分良好，这样才能安抚他们。动荡、叛乱，以及小型的内战烽火，全都需要花上大笔费用才能摆平。”
“可是在克里昂统治之下，时局一向很平静，我们前后已有五十年的和平。”
“没错，不过原本待遇优厚的战士，若是只为天下太平而遭到减薪，心中一定愤愤不平。舰队司令则拒绝只因不再有那么多任务，就让政府将他们降级，并将他们的星舰编为后备舰队。因此信用点继续流失，流到不事生产的武装部队手里，任由与国计民生息息相关的方面日益恶化。这就是我所谓的哀败，你不同意吗？难道你不认为，最后你会把这些观点全部融入心理史学的概念中？”
谢顿不安地挪动一下，然后说：“对了，我们要到哪里去？”
“川陀大学。”
“啊，难怪这个区的名字那么熟悉，我听说过那所大学。”
“我并不惊讶。川陀有将近十万所高等教育机构，川陀大学属于排名最前面的一千多所。”
“我要待在那里吗？”
“要待一阵子。大体而言，大学校园是不可侵犯的神圣殿堂，你在那里会很安全。”
“可是我在那里受欢迎吗？”
“为何不会？这年头很难找到一位好的数学家。他们或许能善用你，你或许也能善用他们，不只把它当成避难所。”
“你的意思是说，我可以在那里发展我的理论。”
“你答应过的。”夫铭严肃地说。
“我只答应试试看。”谢顿一面说，一而想道：就像是答应试着用沙土搓出一条绳子。
Chapter 15

Conversation had run out after that and Seldon watched the structures of the Streeling Sector as they passed. Some were quite low, while some seemed to brush the "sky." Wide crosspassages broke the progression and frequent alleys could be seen.
At one point, it struck him that though the buildings rose upward they also swept downward and that perhaps they were deeper than they were high. As soon as the thought occurred to him, he was convinced it was true. Occasionally, he saw patches of green in the background, farther back from the Expressway, and even small trees.
He watched for quite a while and then became aware that the light was growing dimmer. He squinted about and turned to Hummin, who guessed the question.
"The afternoon is waning," he said, "and night is coming on."
Seldons eyebrows raised and the corners of his mouth turned downward. "Thats impressive. I have a picture of the entire planet darkening and then, some hours from now, lighting up again."
Hummin smiled his small, careful smile. "Not quite, Seldon. The planet is never turned off altogether--or turned on either. The shadow of twilight sweeps across the planet gradually, followed half a day later by the slow brightening of dawn. In fact, the effect follows the actual day and night above the domes quite closely, so that in higher altitudes day and night change length with the seasons."
Seldon shook his head, "But why close in the planet and then mimic what would be in the open?"
"I presume because people like it better that way. Trantorians like the advantages of being enclosed, but they dont like to be reminded of it unduly, just the same. You know very little about Trantorian psychology, Seldon."
Seldon flushed slightly. He was only a Heliconian and he knew very little about the millions of worlds outside Helicon. His ignorance was not confined to Trantor. How, then, could he hope to come up with any practical applications for his theory of psychohistory?
How could any number of people--all together--know enough? It reminded Seldon of a puzzle that had been presented to him when he was young: Can you have a relatively small piece of platinum, with handholds affixed, that could not be lifted by the bare, unaided strength of any number of people, no matter how many?
The answer was yes. A cubic meter of platinum weighs 22,420 kilograms under standard gravitational pull. If it is assumed that each person could heave 120 kilograms up from the ground, then 188 people would suffice to lift the platinum.--But you could not squeeze 188 people around the cubic meter so that each one could get a grip on it. You could perhaps not squeeze more than 9 people around it. And levers or other such devices were not allowed. It had to be "bare, unaided strength."
In the same way, it could be that there was no way of getting enough people to handle the total amount of knowledge required for psychohistory, even if the facts were stored in computers rather than in individual human brains. Only so many people could gather round the knowledge, so to speak, and communicate it.
Hummin said, "You seem to be in a brown study, Seldon."
"Im considering my own ignorance."
"A useful task. Quadrillions could profitably join you.--But its time to get off."Seldon looked up. "How can you tell?"
"Just as you could tell when you were on the Expressway your first day on Trantor. I go by the signs."
Seldon caught one just as it went by: STREELING UNIVERSITY--3 MINUTES.
"We get off at the next boarding station. Watch your step."
Seldon followed Hummin off the coach, noting that the sky was deep purple now and that the walkways and corridors and buildings were all lighting up, suffused with a yellow glow.
It might have been the gathering of a Heliconian night. Had he been placed here blindfolded and had the blindfold been removed, he might have been convinced that he was in some particularly well-built-up inner region of one of Helicons larger cities.
"How long do you suppose I will remain at Streeling University, Hummin?" he asked.
Hummin said in his usual calm fashion, "That would be hard to say, Seldon. Perhaps your whole life."
"What!"
"Perhaps not. But your life stopped being your own once you gave that paper on psychohistory. The Emperor and Demerzel recognized your importance at once. So did I. For all I know, so did many others. You see, that means you dont belong to yourself anymore."
Library
VENABILI, DORS-- ... Historian, born in Cinna ... Her life might well have continued on its uneventful course were it not for the fact that, after she had spent two years on the faculty of Streeling University, she became involved with the young Hari Seldon during The Flight ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

第十五章
　　他们的谈话就此告一段落，谢顿开始观察经过的各种斯璀璘区建筑。有些建筑物相当低矮，有些似乎能顶到“天空”。宽阔的陆桥不时将道路打断，常常还能看到一些大大小小的巷道。
在某一刻，他突然想到这些建筑虽然向上发展，但同样也向下扎根，说不定它们的深度还超过高度。心中一旦起了这个念头，他便相信事实正是如此。
他偶尔会在远处看到几块绿地，都是在远离磁浮捷运路线的地方，有几处甚至还有些小树。
他凝望了一阵子，然后发觉光线逐渐变暗。他向左右瞥了一眼，再转头望向夫铭，后者已经猜到他的问题。
“下午接近尾声，”他说，“夜晚快要来临了。”
谢顿扬起眉毛，两侧嘴角往下一撇：“这可真是壮观。我心中浮现出一个画面，整个行星同时暗下来，而在数个小时后，又重新大放光明。”
夫铭露出惯有的、谨慎的浅笑：“并不尽然，谢顿。这颗行星的照明从未全部关闭，也从不会完全开启。黄昏的阴影逐渐扫过整个行星，而各地在半天之后，又会出现一道破晓的曙光。事实上，这种效应和穹顶上真实的昼夜相当接近，因此在高纬度地区，昼夜的长短会随着季节的变迁而改变。”
谢顿摇了摇头：“可是为何要把行星封闭起来，然后又模仿露天的情形呢？”
“我想是因为人们比较喜欢这样。川陀人喜欢封闭世界的优点，却又不喜欢被过多的现象提醒这件事实。你对川陀人的心理知道得很少，谢顿。”
谢顿微微涨红了腧。他只是个赫利肯人，对其他数以千万计的世界几乎一无所知，这种无知不仅限于川陀而已。那么，他怎能期望自己为心理史学理论找出实际应用呢？
不论为数多大的一群人——通通加在一起——都无法构成足够了解的量吧。
这使谢顿想起少年时期读到的一个智力测验：你能不能找到相当小的一块白金，它的表面附有握把，但不论找来多少人，也不能赤手空拳合力将它举起？
答案是可以的。在标准重力下，一立方米的白金重二万二千四百二十公斤。假设每个人能从地上举起一百二十公斤的重物，那么一百八十七个人就足以举起那块白金。可是你无法让一百八十七个人挤在一立方米的白金四周，让每个人都能抓住它；你也许顶多只能让九个人挤在它周围。而杠杆或类似装置全无用武之地，因为前提是必须“赤手空拳”。
同理，也有可能永远无法找到足够的人，来处理心理史学所需要的所有知识。
即使那些历史事实贮存在计算机中，而并非在各人的大脑里。而唯有借助计算机，众人才能围绕在这些知识周围（姑且这么说），并且互相交流知识。
夫铭说：“你似乎陷人沉思，谢顿。”
“我正在省思自己的无知。”
“这是一项有用的工作，数万兆的人都该加入你的行列，这样大家都能受惠。不过，现在该下车了。”
谢顿抬起头来：“你怎么知道？”
“正如你在川陀的第一天坐磁浮捷运就能知道一样，我是根据沿途的路标。”
此时，谢顿也看到一个即将消逝的路标：“川陀大学——三分钟”。
“我们在下个专用车站下车。小心台阶。”
谢顿跟着夫铭走下车厢，注意到天空如今呈深紫色，而人行道、回廊、建筑物都已灯火通明，到处弥漫着一种黄色光晕。
这也可能是赫利肯的傍晚时分。假如他被蒙着眼带到这里，然后再将眼罩拿掉，他或许会相信身处于赫利肯一个较大城市的中心繁华区。
“你想我会在川陀大学待多久，夫铭？”他问道。
夫铭以一贯的冷静态度答道：“这很难说，谢顿，也许一辈子。”
“什么！‘’
“也许不用那么久。可是在你发表那篇心理史学的论文之后，你的生命就不再是你自己的了。皇上和丹莫茨尔立刻察觉到你的重要性，而我也是。据我所知，还有很多人跟我们一样。你懂吧，这就代表你再也不属于自己了。”
Chapter 16

The room that Hari Seldon found himself in was larger than Hummins room in the Imperial Sector. It was a bedroom with one corner serving as a washroom and with no sign of any cooking or dining facilities. There was no window, though set in the ceiling was a grilled ventilator that made a steady sighing noise. Seldon looked about a bit ruefully.
Hummin interpreted that look with his usual assured manner and said, "Its only for tonight, Seldon. Tomorrow morning someone will come to install you at the University and you will be more comfortable."
"Pardon me, Hummin, but how do you know that?"
"I will make arrangements. I know one or two people here"--he smiled briefly without humor--"and I have a favor or two I can ask repayment for. Now lets go into some details."
He gazed steadily at Seldon and said, "Whatever you have left in your hotel room is lost. Does that include anything irreplaceable?"
"Nothing really irreplaceable. I have some personal items I value for their association with my past life, but if they are gone, they are gone. There are, of course, some notes on my paper. Some calculations. The paper itself."
"Which is now public knowledge until such time as it is removed from circulation as dangerous--which it probably will be. Still, Ill be able to get my hands on a copy, Im sure. In any case, you can reconstruct it, cant you?"
"I can. Thats why I said there was nothing really irreplaceable. Also, Ive lost nearly a thousand credits, some books, clothing, my tickets back to Helicon, things like that."
"All replaceable.--Now I will arrange for you to have a credit tile in my name, charged to me. That will take care of ordinary expenses."
"Thats unusually generous of you. I cant accept it."
"Its not generous at all, since Im hoping to save the Empire in that fashion. You must accept it."
"But how much can you afford, Hummin? Ill be using it, at best, with an uneasy conscience."
"Whatever you need for survival or reasonable comfort I can afford, Seldon. Naturally, I wouldnt want you to try to buy the University gymnasium or hand out a million credits in largess."
"You neednt worry, but with my name on record--"
"It might as well be. It is absolutely forbidden for the Imperial government to exercise any security control over the University or its members. There is complete freedom. Anything can be discussed here, anything can be said here."
"What about violent crime?"
"Then the University authorities themselves handle it, with reason and care--and there are virtually no crimes of violence. The students and faculty appreciate their freedom and understand its terms. Too much rowdiness, the beginning of riot and bloodshed, and the government may feel it has a right to break the unwritten agreement and send in the troops. No one wants that, not even the government, so a delicate balance is maintained. In other words, Demerzel himself can not have you plucked out of the University without a great deal more cause than anyone in the University has given the government in at least a century and a half. On the other hand, if you are lured off the grounds by a student-agent--"
"Are there student-agents?"
"How can I say? There may be. Any ordinary individual can be threatened or maneuvered or simply bought--and may remain thereafter in the service of Demerzel or of someone else, for that matter. So I must emphasize this: You are safe in any reasonable sense, but no one is absolutely safe. You will have to be careful. But though I give you that warning, I dont want you to cower through life. On the whole, you will be far more secure here than you would have been if you had returned to Helicon or gone to any world of the Galaxy outside Trantor."
"I hope so," said Seldon drearily.
"I know so," said Hummin, "Or I would not feel it wise to leave you."
"Leave me?" Seldon looked up sharply. "You cant do that. You know this world. I dont."
"You will be with others who know this world, who know this part of it, in fact, even better than I do. As for myself, I must go. I have been with you all this day and I dare not abandon my own life any longer. I must not attract too much attention to myself. Remember that I have my own insecurities, just as you have yours."
Seldon blushed. "Youre right. I cant expect you to endanger yourself indefinitely on my behalf. I hope you are not already ruined."
Hummin said coolly, "Who can tell? We live in dangerous times. Just remember that if anyone can make the times safe--if not for ourselves, then for those who follow after us--it is you. Let that thought be your driving force, Seldon."
第十六章
第四部 图书馆
铎丝•凡纳比里：……历史学家，生于锡纳……
若非她在川陀大学担任教职两年后，与“逃亡期”中的年轻的哈　里•谢顿邂逅，她很可能一直过着平静无波的日子……
——《银河百科全书》


第十六章
哈里•谢顿如今置身的房间，比夫铭在皇区的住所宽敞。它是一间单人卧房，其中一角充作盥洗间，却不见任何烹饪或进餐设备。四面都没有窗户，不过有个罩着网格的抽风机装在屋顶，一直发出稳定而轻微的噪音。
谢顿带着些许失望，四处张望了一下。
夫铭以惯有的自信猜到了谢顿的心事。“只是今晚暂时住在这里，谢顿。明天早上就会有人来，将你安置到大学里，到时就会比较舒服。”
“你怎么知道，夫铭？”
“我会做好安排，我在这里认识了一两个人。”他露出一丝冷笑，“而且我帮助过他们，可以要求他们还我一两个人情。现在，让我们来谈谈细节。”
他定睛凝视着谢顿，又说：“你留在旅馆房间的行李等于丢了。里面有没有任何无法弥补的东西？”
“没什么真正无法弥补的。有些私人物品我很珍惜，因为具有纪念价值，不过丢了就丢了。此外，还有些和我的论文有关的笔记、一些计算稿，以及那篇论文。”
“你的论文如今是公开的资料，等哪天被视为危险的邪说，它才会被禁止流传——这是可能发生的事。纵使如此，我总有办法弄到一份副本，我绝对肯定。无论如何，你一定能重新推导一遍，对不对？”
“可以，所以我说没什么真正无法弥补的。此外，我还丢了将近一千信用点、一些书籍、衣物，以及回赫利肯的旅行票，诸如此类的东西。”
“全都不成问题。我会用我的名义帮你中请一张信用磁卡，记到我的账上，这样就能应付你的一般开销。”
“你实在慷慨得过分，我不能接受。”
“一点也不算慷慨，因为我这样做是希望拯救帝国，你无论如何要接受。”
“可是你付得起多少呢，夫铭？即使我勉强接受，也一定会感到良心不安。”
“你的基本衣食住行，以及任何合理的享乐，我全都负担得起。当然，我不会希望你试图买下大学体育馆，或是慷慨地捐出一百万信用点。”
“你不用担心，可是我的名字留下记录……”
“这点没有关系，帝国政府绝不可对大学或其成员采取任何安全控制。这里有绝对的自由，任何事情都能谈论，什么话都可以说。”
“万一有暴力犯罪呢？”
“那么校方会出面处理，以合情合理而谨慎的方式——其实几乎没有什么暴力犯罪。学生和教员都珍惜他们的自由，并且了解它的分寸。过度的喧闹是暴动和流血的开端，政府可能会觉得有权打破不成文的约定，而派军队进入校园。没有人愿意发生这种事，甚至政府也不愿意，因此维持着一种微妙的平衡。换句话说，丹莫茨尔本人也不能把你从这所大学抓走，除非大学中出现严重事端，至少一个半世纪以来还从未有过。反之，假如你被职业学生诱出校园……”
“有职业学生吗？”
“我怎么说得准？或许有吧。任何一个普通人都可能被威胁、被设计，或是直接被收买，从此一直为丹莫茨尔或其他人服务。所以我必须强调一点：理论上你无论如何都很安全．可是没有人绝对安全，你必须自己多加小心。不过，虽然我给你这样的警告，我并不希望你的日子过得畏畏缩缩。整体而言，比起你回到赫利肯或是跑到川陀以外的任何世界，你待在这里要安全得多。”
“我希望果真如此。”谢顿以阴郁的口吻说。
“我知道的确如此，”夫铭说，“否则我会感到离开你是不智之举。”
“离开我？”谢顿猛然抬起头来，“你不能这么做。你了解这个世界，我却不然。”
“你将和其他了解这个世界的人在一起。事实上，他们对此地的了解甚至在我之上。至于我自己，我必须走了。我已经跟你在一起整整一天，我必须顾及自己的生活。我自己绝不能吸引太多的注意，你应该记得，我跟你一样有安全的顾虑。”
谢顿不禁面红耳赤：“你说得对。我不能期望你为我不断赴汤蹈火，希望现在还不至于毁了你。”
夫铭以冷淡的语调说道：“谁知道呢？我们生在一个险恶的时代。你只要记住一件事，要说有什么人能创造安全的时代——即使不为我们，也是为了我们的后世——那个人就是你。让这个想法成为你的原动力，谢顿。”
Chapter 17

Sleep eluded Seldon. He tossed and turned in the dark, thinking. He had have never felt quite so alone or quite so helpless as he did after Hummin had nodded, pressed his hand briefly, and left him behind. Now he was on a strange world--and in a strange part of that world. He was without the only person he could consider a friend (and that of less than a days duration) and he had no idea of where he was going or what he would be doing, either tomorrow or at any time in the future.
None of that was conducive to sleep so, of course, at about the time he decided, hopelessly, that he would not sleep that night or, possibly, ever again, exhaustion overtook him ...
When he woke up it was still dark--or not quite, for across the room he saw a red light flashing brightly and rapidly, accompanied by a harsh, intermittent buzz. Undoubtedly, it was that which had awakened him. As he tried to remember where he was and to make some sort of sense out of the limited messages his senses were receiving, the flashing and buzzing ceased and he became aware of a peremptory rapping.
Presumably, the rapping was at the door, but he didnt remember where the door was. Presumably, also, there was a contact that would flood the room with light, but he didnt remember where that was either.
He sat up in bed and felt along the wall to his left rather desperately while calling out, "One moment, please."
He found the necessary contact and the room suddenly bloomed with a soft light. He scrambled out of bed, blinking, still searching for the door, finding it, reaching out to open it, remembering caution at the last moment, and saying in a suddenly stern, no-nonsense voice, "Whos there?"
A rather gentle womans voice said, "My dame is Dors Venabili and I have come to see Dr. Hari Seldon."
Even as that was said, a woman was standing just in front of the door, without that door ever having been opened.
For a moment, Hari Seldon stared at her in surprise, then realized that he was wearing only a one-piece undergarment. He let out a strangled gasp and dashed for the bed and only then realized that he was staring at a holograph. It lacked the hard edge of reality and it became apparent the woman wasnt looking at him. She was merely showing herself for identification. He paused, breathing hard, then said, raising his voice to be heard through the door, "If youll wait, Ill be with you. Give me ... maybe half an hour."
The woman--or the holograph, at any rate--said, "Ill wait," and disappeared.
There was no shower, so he sponged himself, making a rare mess on the tiled floor in the washroom corner. There was toothpaste but no toothbrush, so he used his finger. He had no choice but to put on the clothes he had been wearing the day before. He finally opened the door.
He realized, even as he did so, that she had not really identified herself. She had merely given a name and Hummin had not told him whom to expect, whether it was to be this Dors Somebody or anyone else. He had felt secure because the holograph was that of a personable young woman, but for all he knew there might be half a dozen hostile young men with her.
He peered out cautiously, saw only the woman, then opened the door sufficiently to allow her to enter. He immediately closed and locked the door behind her. "Pardon me," he said, "What time is it?"
"Nine," she said, "The day has long since begun."
As far as official time was concerned, Trantor held to Galactic Standard, since only so could sense be made out of interstellar commerce and governmental dealings. Each world, however, also had a local time system and Seldon had not yet come to the point where he felt at home with casual Trantorian references to the hour.
"Midmorning?" he said.
"Of course."
"There are no windows in this room," he said defensively.
Dors walked to his bed, reached out, and touched a small dark spot on the wall.
Red numbers appeared on the ceiling just over his pillow. They read: 0903. She smiled without superiority. "Im sorry," she said. "But I rather assumed Chetter Hummin would have told you Id be coming for you at nine. The trouble with him is hes so used to knowing, he sometimes forgets that others occasionally dont know.--And I shouldnt have used radio-holographic identification. I imagine you dont have it on Helicon and Im afraid I must have alarmed you."
Seldon felt himself relax. She seemed natural and friendly and the casual reference to Hummin reassured him. He said, "Youre quite wrong about Helicon, Miss--"
"Please call me Dors."
"Youre still wrong about Helicon, Dors. We do have radioholography, but Ive never been able to afford the equipment. Nor could anyone in my circle, so I havent actually had the experience. But I understood what had happened soon enough."
He studied her. She was not very tall, average height for a woman, he judged. Her hair was a reddish-gold, though not very bright, and was arranged in shore curls about her head. (He had seen a number of women in Trantor with their hair so arranged. It was apparently a local fashion that would have been laughed at in Helicon.) She was not amazingly beautiful, but was quite pleasant to look at, this being helped by full lips that seemed to have a slight humorous curl to them. She was slim, well-built, and looked quite young. (Too young, he thought uneasily, to be of use perhaps.)
"Do I pass inspection?" she asked. (She seemed to have Hummins trick of guessing his thoughts, Seldon thought, or perhaps he himself lacked the trick of hiding them.)
He said, "Im sorry. I seem to have been staring, but Ive only been trying to evaluate you. Im in a strange place. I know no one and have no friends."
"Please, Dr. Seldon, count me as a friend. Mr. Hummin has asked me to take care of you."
Seldon smiled ruefully. "You may be a little young for the job."
"Youll find I am not."
"Well, Ill try to be as little trouble as possible. Could you please repeat your name?"
"Dors Venabili." She spelled the last name and emphasized the stress on the second syllable. "As I said, please call me Dors and if you dont object too strenuously I will call you Hari. Were quite informal here at the University and there is an almost self-conscious effort to show no signs of status, either inherited or professional."
"Please, by all means, call me Hari."
"Good. I shall remain informal then. For instance, the instinct for formality, if there is such a thing, would cause me to ask permission to sit down. Informally, however, I shall just sit." She then sat down on the one chair in the room.
Seldon cleared his throat. "Clearly, Im not at all in possession of my ordinary faculties. I should have asked you to sit." He sat down on the side of his crumpled bed and wished he had thought to straighten it out somewhat--but he had been caught by surprise.
She said pleasantly, "This is how its going to work, Hari. First, well go to breakfast at one of the University cafes. Then Ill get you a room in one of the domiciles--a better room than this. Youll have a window. Hummin has instructed me to get you a credit tile in his name, but it will take me a day or two to extort one out of the University bureaucracy. Until thats done, Ill be responsible for your expenses and you can pay me back later.--And we can use you. Chetter Hummin told me youre a mathematician and for some reason theres a serious lack of good ones at the University."
"Did Hummin tell you that I was a good mathematician?"
"As a matter of fact, he did. He said you were a remarkable man--"
"Well." Seldon looked down at his fingernails. "I would like to be considered so, but Hummin knew me for less than a day and, before that, he had heard me present a paper, the quality of which he has no way of judging. I think he was just being polite."
"I dont think so," said Dors. "He is a remarkable person himself and has had a great deal of experience with people. Ill go by his judgment. In any case, I imagine youll have a chance to prove yourself. You can program computers, I suppose."
"Of course."
"Im talking about teaching computers, you understand, and Im asking if you can devise programs to teach various phases of contemporary mathematics."
"Yes, thats part of my profession. Im assistant professor of mathematics at the University of Helicon."
She said, "Yes, I know. Hummin told me that. It means, of course, that everyone will know you are a non-Trantorian, but that will present no serious problems. Were mainly Trantorian here at the University, but theres a substantial minority of Outworlders from any number of different worlds and thats accepted. I wont say that youll never hear a planetary slur but actually the Outworlders are more likely to use them than the Trantorians. Im an Outworlder myself, by the way."
"Oh?" He hesitated and then decided it would be only polite to ask. "What world are you from?"
"Im from Cinna. Have you ever heard of it?"
Hed be caught out if he was polite enough to lie, Seldon decided, so he said, "No."
"Im not surprised. Its probably of even less account than Helicon is. Anyway, to get back to the programming of mathematical teaching computers, I suppose that that can be done either proficiently or poorly."
"Absolutely."
"And you would do it proficiently."
"I would like to think so."
"There you are, then. The University will pay you for that, so lets go out and eat. Did you sleep well, by the way?"
"Surprisingly, I did."
"And are you hungry?"
"Yes, but--" He hesitated.
She said cheerfully, "But youre worried about the quality of the food, is that it? Well, dont be. Being an Outworlder myself, I can understand your feelings about the strong infusion of microfood into everything, but the University menus arent bad. In the faculty dining room, at least. The students suffer a bit, but that serves to harden them."
She rose and turned to the door, but stopped when Seldon could not keep himself from saying, "Are you a member of the faculty?"
She turned and smiled at him impishly. "Dont I look old enough? I got my doctorate two years ago at Cinna and Ive been here ever since. In two weeks, Ill be thirty."
"Sorry," said Seldon, smiling in his turn, "but you cant expect to look twenty-four and not raise doubts as to your academic status."
"Arent you nice?" said Dors and Seldon felt a certain pleasure wash over him. After all, he thought, you cant exchange pleasantries with an attractive woman and feel entirely like a stranger.

第十七章
　　今晚睡眠与谢顿无缘，他在黑暗中辗转反侧，思绪一直不断。在夫铭点了点头，轻轻按按他的手，然后离他而去之后，谢顿感受到前所未有的孤独、前所未有的无助。如今他置身一个陌生的世界，而且是这个陌生世界的一个陌生角落。连唯一可以当做朋友的人（却也不到一天的交情）都不在身边，而且他对何去何从毫无概念，不论是明天或是未来任何时刻。
当然，这些想法全都无助于入眠。差不多在他无奈地认定今晚将失眠到天亮，而这种情况今后还可能发生时，极度的困倦终于将他席卷……
当他醒来的时候，屋内依旧一片黑暗——但也并非全然如此，因为在房间的另一侧，他看见一道明亮的红光在迅速闪动，伴随着一阵刺耳的间歇性嗡嗡声。毫无疑问，将他吵醒的就是这个声音。
当他正在努力回忆身在何处，并试图从感官所接收的有限信息理出一个头绪时，闪光与嗡嗡声突然停止。接着，他听到一阵凶猛的敲击声。
敲击声想必源自房门，但他不记得房门的位置。此外，想必有个开关能让窒内大放光明，可是他也忘了开关在哪里。
他连忙坐起身来，双手搜索着左侧墙擘，同时大声喊道：“请等一下。”
他终于找到开关，房间在一瞬间注满了柔和的光线。
他从床上匆匆爬起来，一面眨着眼睛，一面继续寻找房门。找着之后，他伸手想要打开，却在最后一刻想到应该谨慎行事。于是，他不再胡乱应声，突然改用严肃声音问道：“哪一位？”
回答的是一个颇为温柔的女声：“我名叫铎丝•凡纳比里，我来找哈里•谢顿博士。”
话还未说完，一名女子突然出现在尚未完全打开的房门边。
一时之间，哈里•谢顿万分惊讶地瞪着她，忽然想到自己只穿了一套单件内衣。他发出一声像是被掐什脖子的喘息，慌忙向睡床奔去；几乎在同一瞬间，他才回过神来，明白他见到的只是个全息像。它不像真人那样轮廓分明，而且这名女子显然没有望着他，她现身只是为了表明自己的身份。
于是他停下脚步，使劲吸了一口气，然后提高音量，好让声音穿出门外，“请你等一下，我待会儿就帮你开门。给我……或许半小时的时间。”
那名女子——或者说那个全息像答道：“我会等您。”说完，影像就不见了。
房里没有淋浴设备，所以他用海绵抹了个澡，将盥洗间的瓷砖地板弄得有些脏乱。盥洗间备有牙膏，可是没有牙刷，他只好用手指代替。然后，他又不得不套上昨天穿过的衣服。一切准备就绪之后，他终于将房门打开。
他正在开门的时候，又想到她并未真正表明身份。她只不过报出一个姓名，但夫铭没说来找他的会是什么人——究竟是这个叫铎丝什么的还是其他任何人。
他之所以感到安全无虞，是因为全息像是个可人的年轻女子。问题是他又怎能确定，她身边没有五六个充满敌意的年轻男子随行。
他小心翼翼地向外窥探，结果仅仅见到那名女子，于是将房门再拉开一点，刚好足够让她进来。然后，他立刻将房门关上并锁好。
“对不起，”他说，“请问现在几点了？”
“九点，”她说，“已经不早了。”
只要是正式的计时，川陀一律采用银河标准时间，因为唯有如此，星际贸易与政府行政才能顺利进行。然而每个世界也都有个当地的计时系统，对于川陀人随口所说的钟点，谢顿还不太熟悉。
“上午过了一半？”
“当然。”
“这个房间没有窗子。”他为自己辩护。
铎丝走到他的床边，伸手触向墙上的一个小黑点。床头上方立刻显现一组红色数字：○九○三。
她露出不带优越感的微笑。“很抱歉，”她说，“但我本来以为契特•夫铭会告诉你，我将在上午九点来找你。他的问题是他一向无所不知，偶尔会忘记别人有时并不知道。而且，我不该使用电波全息识别器，我猜你们赫利肯没有这种东西，只怕我一定把你吓着了。”
谢顿松了一口气。她的态度似乎相当自然、友善，而她随口提到了夫铭的名字，也就让他更加放心。他说：“你对赫利肯有很深的误解，凡……小姐。”
“请叫我铎丝。”
“铎丝，你对赫利肯真的有误解。我们的确有电波全息像，不过我向来买不起那种设备。在我周围的人也都没这个能力，所以实际上我等于没有经验。但是，我很快就明白发生了什么事。”
他开始打量她。她的个子不很高，对女子而言应该是中等高度（他这么判断）。她的头发是略红的金色，但是不怎么闪亮，烫成了许多短短的发卷。（他在川陀见到许多女子是这种发型，这显然是本地的一种流行，在赫利肯则会受到众人的嘲笑。）她并没有惊人的美貌，可是看起来让人觉得很舒服，再加上丰满、似乎带着些许俏皮弧度的双唇，使她显得更加可爱。她的身材苗条，胸部丰挺，而且看来相当年轻。（太年轻了，他不安地想到，可能对他帮助不大。）
“我通过检查了吗？”她问道。（她似乎跟夫铭一样，也有本事猜中自己的心思，谢顿想，或许是他自己没有隐藏心思的本事。）
他说：“很抱歉，我好像在瞪着你看，但我只是想对你做个估量。我身处一个陌生的地方，什么人都不认识，也没有任何朋友。”
“谢顿博士，请把我当朋友吧，夫铭特别请我来照顾你。”
谢顿露出一个苦笑：“就这个工作而言，你可能太年轻了点。”
“你会发现其实不然。”
“好吧。我会尽量不惹麻烦。能不能请你再讲一遍你的名字？”
“铎丝•凡纳比里。”她一字一顿地说得很仔细，“我刚才说过，请叫我铎丝，而你若是不反对，我准备称呼你哈里。在大学里我们相当不拘形式，而且人人都自觉地尽量避免显露任何地位象征，不论是天生的还是职务上的。”
“当然没问题，就请你叫我哈里吧。”
“很好，那么我就继续不拘形式。比方说，拘泥形式的本能——如果真有这种东西——会让我请求你准我坐下。但是既然不拘形式，我就自便了。”说完，她就坐到室内唯一的一张椅子上。
谢顿清了清喉咙：“显然我还没有完全清醒，我应该先请你坐才对。”他在皱成一团的床铺边缘坐下，后悔自己未曾想到将它拉平一点——但是刚才他根本措于不及。
她以愉悦的口吻说：“我把计划跟你说一下，哈里。首先，我们到校同某间小餐厅去吃早餐。然后我会帮你在学校找个房间，比这间还好的房间，至少会有窗子。夫铭曾嘱咐我以他的名义帮你申请一张信用磁卡，不过我得花上一两天时间，才能从校方的官僚系统弄一张来。在此之前，我会负责支付你的花费，你可以过后再还给我——我们可以雇用你，契特•夫铭告诉我说你是个数学家。不知道为什么，这所大学严重缺乏这方面的优秀人才。”
“夫铭跟你说我是个优秀的数学家？”
“事实上他的确这么说过，他说你是个了不起的人。”
“嗯，”谢顿低头望着自己的指甲，“我当然希望自己有这种评价，可是夫铭认识我不到一天，而在此之前，他只听过我发表一篇论文，论文的水平他根本无法判断。我想他那样说只是一种礼貌。”
“我不这么认为。”铎丝说，“他自己就是个了不起的人，而且他阅人无数，我愿意相信他的判断。无论如何，我想你总有机会证明你自己。你应该会写计算机程式吧。”
“当然。”
“我是说教学计算机，这点你要明白。我是在问你能不能设计一些程序，来教授当代数学的各个领域。”
“可以，那是我的专长之一，我是赫利肯大学数学系的助理教授。”
她又说：“是的，我知道，夫铭跟我提过。这就代表说，大家都会知道你不是川陀人，不过这点不会构成严重问题。我们这所大学的主要成员是川陀人，但也有不少来自各个世界的外星人士，这点大家都能接受。我不敢说你绝不会听到诋毁外星人的言语，然而事实上，出自外景人士之口的机会比再自川陀人还要大。对了，我自己就是外星人士。”
“哦？”他迟疑了一下，然后想到至少礼貌上该问一问。“你是从哪个世界来的？”
“我是从锡纳来的，你听过那个地方吗？”
如果为了礼貌而撒谎，那注定会露出马脚，谢顿判断。因此他说：“没有。”
“我并不惊讶，它说不定比赫利肯更名不见经传——不管这些，还是回到设计数学教学计算机的问题，我想这项工作也有良莠之分吧。”
“完全正确。”
“而你会做得又快又好。”
“这我应该还有信心。”
“那就没问题。校方会支付你酬劳，所以让我们出去吃一顿吧。对了，你睡得好吗？”
“出乎意料之外，睡得很好。”
“你饿了吗？”
“饿了，可是……”他迟疑了一下。
她快活地说：“可是你担心食物的质量，对不对？嗯，大可不必。我自己也是外星人上，能了解你对每样东西都掺入过多微生食品的感受，不过大学的菜肴还不坏，至少教员餐厅如此。学生们则委屈一点，但这正好可以磨炼他们。”
她起身朝门口走去，谢顿不吐不快的一句问话又让她停下脚步。“你也是一名教员吗？”
她转过身来，对他露出顽皮的笑容：“我看来不够老吗？我两年前在锡纳拿到博士学位，之后一直待在此地。再过两个星期，我就二十岁了。”
“对不起，”这回谢顿露出微笑，“但你看来顶多二十四，想不让人怀疑你的学位是不可能的。”
“你这不是很体贴吗？”铎丝说。
谢顿立刻感到一股喜悦袭上心头，毕竟，他想，当你跟一位迷人的女子瓦开玩笑时，绝不可能感到百分之百像个陌生人。
Chapter 18

Dors was right. Breakfast was by no means bad. There was something that was unmistakably eggy and the meat was pleasantly smoked. The chocolate drink (Trantor was strong on chocolate and Seldon did not mind that) was probably synthetic, but it was tasty and the breakfast rolls were good. He felt is only right to say as much. "This has been a very pleasant breakfast. Food. Surroundings. Everything."
"Im delighted you think so," said Dors.
Seldon looked about. There were a bank of windows in one wall and while actual sunlight did not enter (he wondered if, after a while, he would learn to be satisfied with diffuse daylight and would cease to look for patches of sunlight in a room), the place was light enough. In fact, it was quite bright, for the local weather computer had apparently decided is was time for a sharp, clear day.
The cables were arranged for four apiece and most were occupied by the full number, but Dors and Seldon remained alone at theirs. Dors had called over some of the men and women and had introduced them. All had been polite, but none had joined them. Undoubtedly, Dors intended that to be so, but Seldon did not see how she managed to arrange it.
He said, "You havent introduced me to any mathematicians, Dors."
"I havent seen any that I know. Most mathematicians start the day early and have classes by eight. My own feeling is that any student so foolhardy as to take mathematics wants to get that part of the course over with as soon as possible."
"I take it youre not a mathematician yourself."
"Anything but," said Dors with a short laugh. "Anything. History is my field. Ive already published some studies on the rise of Trantor--I mean the primitive kingdom, not this world. I suppose that will end up as my field of specialization--Royal Trantor."
"Wonderful," said Seldon.
"Wonderful?" Dors looked at him quizzically. "Are you interested in Royal Trantor too?"
"In a way, yes. That and other things like that. Ive never really studied history and I should have."
"Should you? If you had studied history, youd scarcely have had time to study mathematics and mathematicians are very much needed--especially at this University. Were full to here with historians," she said, raising her hand to her eyebrows, "and economists and political scientists, but were short on science and mathematics. Chetter Hummin pointed that out to me once. He called it the decline of science and seemed to think it was a general phenomenon."
Seldon said, "Of course, when I say I should have studied history, I dont mean that I should have made it a life work. I meant I should have studied enough to help me in my mathematics. My field of specialization is the mathematical analysis of social structure."
"Sounds horrible."
"In a way, it is. Its very complicated and without my knowing a great deal more about how societies evolved its hopeless. My picture is too static, you see."
"I cant see because I know nothing about it. Chetter told me you were developing something called psychohistory and that it was important. Have I got it right? Psychohistory?"
"Thats right. I should have called it psychosociology, but it seemed to me that was too ugly a word. Or perhaps I knew instinctively that a knowledge of history was necessary and then didnt pay sufficient attention to my thoughts."
"Psychohistory does sound better, but I dont know what it is."
"I scarcely do myself." He brooded a few minutes, looking at the woman on the other side of the table and feeling that she might make this exile of his seem a little less like an exile. He thought of the other woman he had known a few years ago, but blocked it off with a determined effort. If he ever found another companion, it would have to be one who understood scholarship and what it demanded of a person.
To get his mind onto a new track, he said, "Chetter Hummin told me that the University is in no way troubled by the government."
"Hes right."
Seldon shook his head. "That seems rather unbelievably forbearing of the Imperial government. The educational institutions on Helicon are by no means so independent of governmental pressures."
"Nor on Cinna. Nor on any Outworld, except perhaps for one or two of the largest. Trantor is another matter."
"Yes, but why?"
"Because its the center of the Empire. The universities here have enormous prestige. Professionals are turned out by any university anywhere, but the administrators of the Empire--the high officials, the countless millions of people who represent the tentacles of Empire reaching into every corner of the Galaxy--are educated right here on Trantor."
"Ive never seen the statistics--" began Seldon.
"Take my word for it. It is important that the officials of the Empire have some common ground, some special feeling for the Empire. And they cant all be native Trantorians or else the Outworlds would grow restless. For that reason, Trantor must attract millions of Outworlders for education here. It doesnt matter where they come from or what their home accent or culture may be, as long as they pick up the Trantorian patina and identify themselves with a Trantorian educational background. Thats what holds the Empire together. The Outworlds are also less restive when a noticeable portion of the administrators who represent the Imperial government are their own people by birth and upbringing."
Seldon felt embarrassed again. This was something he had never given any thought to. He wondered if anyone could be a truly great mathematician if mathematics was all he knew. He said, "Is this common knowledge?"
"I suppose it isnt," said Dors after some thought. "Theres so much knowledge to be had that specialists cling to their specialties as a shield against having to know anything about anything else. They avoid being drowned."
"Yet you know it."
"But thats my specialty. Im a historian who deals with the rise of Royal Trantor and this administrative technique was one of the ways in which Trantor spread its influence and managed the transition from Royal Trantor to Imperial Trantor."
Seldon said, almost as though muttering to himself, "How harmful overspecialization is. It cuts knowledge at a million points and leaves it bleeding."
Dors shrugged. "What can one do?--But you see, if Trantor is going to attract Outworlders to Trantorian universities, it has to give them something in return for uprooting themselves and going to a strange world with an incredibly artificial structure and unusual ways. Ive been here two years and Im still not used to it. I may never get used to it. But then, of course, I dont intend to be an administrator, so Im not forcing myself to be a Trantorian.
"And what Trantor offers in exchange is not only the promise of a position with high status, considerable power, and money, of course, but also freedom. While students are having their--education, they are free to denounce the government, demonstrate against it peacefully, work out their own theories and points of view. They enjoy that and many come here so that they can experience the sensation of liberty."
"I imagine," said Seldon, "that it helps relieve pressure as well. They work off all their resentments, enjoy all the smug self-satisfaction a young revolutionary would have, and by the time they take their place in the Imperial hierarchy, they are ready to settle down into conformity and obedience."
Dors nodded. "You may be right. In any case, the government, for all these reasons, carefully preserves the freedom of the universities. Its not a matter of their being forbearing at all--only clever."
"And if youre not going to be an administrator, Dors, what are you going to be?"
"A historian. Ill teach, put book-films of my own into the programming."
"Not much status, perhaps."
"Not much money, Hari, which is more important. As for status, thats the sort of push and pull Id just as soon avoid. Ive seen many people with status, but Im still looking for a happy one. Status wont sit still under you; you have to continually fight to keep from sinking. Even Emperors manage to come to bad ends most of the time. Someday I may just go back to Cinna and be a professor."
"And a Trantorian education will give you status."
Dors laughed. "I suppose so, but on Cinna who would care? Its a dull world, full of farms and with lots of cattle, both four-legged and two-legged."
"Wont you find it dull after Trantor?"
"Yes, thats what Im counting on. And if it gets too dull, I can always wangle a grant to go here or there to do a little historical research. Thats the advantage of my field."
"A mathematician, on the other hand," said Seldon with a trace of bitterness at something that had never before bothered him, "is expected to sit at his computer and think. And speaking of computers--" He hesitated. Breakfast was done and it seemed to him more than likely she had some duties of her own to attend to.
But she did not seem to be in any great hurry to leave. "Yes? Speaking of computers?"
"Would I be able to get permission to use the history library?"
Now it was she who hesitated. "I think that can be arranged. If you work on mathematics programming, youll probably be viewed as a quasi-member of the faculty and I could ask for you to be given permission. Only--"
"Only?"
"I dont want to hurt your feelings, but youre a mathematician and you say you know nothing about history. Would you know how to make use of a history library?"
Seldon smiled. "I suppose you use computers very much like those in a mathematics library."
"We do, but the programming for each specialty has quirks of its own. You dont know the standard reference book-films, the quick methods of winnowing and skipping. You may be able to find a hyperbolic interval in the dark ..."
"You mean hyperbolic integral," interrupted Seldon softly.
Dors ignored him. "But you probably wont know how to get the terms of the Treaty of Poldark in less than a day and a half."
"I suppose I could learn."
"If ... if ..." She looked a little troubled. "If you want to, I can make a suggestion. I give a weeks course--one hour each day, no credit--on library use. Its for undergraduates. Would you feel it beneath your dignity to sit in on such a course--with undergraduates, I mean? It starts in three weeks."
"You could give me private lessons." Seldon felt a little surprised at the suggestive tone that had entered his voice.
She did not miss it. "I dare say I could, but I think youd be better off with more formal instruction. Well be using the library, you understand, and at the end of the week you will be asked to locate information on particular items of historical interest. You will be competing with the other students all through and that will help you learn. Private tutoring will be far less efficient, I assure you. However, I understand the difficulty of competing with undergraduates. If you dont do as well as they, you may feel humiliated. You must remember, though, that they have already studied elementary history and you, perhaps, may not have."
"I havent. No may about it. But I wont be afraid to compete and I wont mind any humiliation that may come along--if I manage to learn the tricks of the historical reference trade."
It was clear to Seldon that he was beginning to like this young woman and that he was gladly seizing on the chance to be educated by her. He was also aware of the fact that he had reached a turning point in his mind. He had promised Hummin to attempt to work out a practical psychohistory, but that had been a promise of the mind and not the emotions. Now he was determined to seize psychohistory by the throat if he had to--in order to make it practical. That, perhaps, was the influence of Dors Venabili. Or had Hummin counted on that? Hummin, Seldon decided, might well be a most formidable person.

第十八章
　　铎丝说得没错，早餐绝对不差。有一道菜显然是蛋类，肉类则熏得很香。巧克力饮料或许是人工合成食品（川陀人喜爱浓烈的巧克力，这点谢顿并不在意），不过相当可口，面包卷也很好吃。
他觉得实在应该实话实说：“这是一顿非常美好的早餐，食物，气氛，一切都那么好。”
“我很高兴你这么想。”铎丝说。
谢顿四下望了望。一侧墙壁上有排窗户，虽然没有真正的阳光射进来（他突然想到，不知道过一阵子之后，自己会不会满足于漫射的光线，而不再在室内寻找一束束的阳光），餐厅内的光线仍然充足。事实上，这一带相当明亮，地方气象计算机显然决定现在应该是大晴天。
每张餐桌都布置成四座，大都也坐满这个人数，铎丝与谢顿却单独占据一张餐桌。铎丝曾跟一些男男女女打招呼，并为谢顿介绍他们。那些人全都很客气，但没有人加入他们两人中。不用说，这是铎丝的本意，不过谢顿并未看出她是如何做到的。
他说：“你没为我介绍任何数学家，铎丝。”
“我还没看到认识的。大多的数学家都起得很早，在八点钟就有课。根据我个人的感觉，任何莽撞到敢修数学课程的学生，总是希望越早把那堂课上完越好。”
“我猜你自己不是数学家。”
“当然不是，”铎丝发出一声短笑，“绝不是，我的专长是历史，我已发表过一些有关川陀兴起的研究，我的意思是原始的王国，不是这个世界。我想这将成为我专攻的领域——王国时期的川陀。”
“太好了。”谢顿说：
“太好了？”铎丝不解地槊着他，“你也对‘王国川陀’有兴趣？”
“就某个角度而言，的确如此。我并非专指这个问题，还包括其他类似的题目。我从未真地研究过历史，当初应该多下工夫。”
“应该吗？要是你下过工夫研究历史，你就几乎没有时间研究数学了，而如今正在闹数学家荒——尤其是这所大学。我们的历史学家、经济学家和政治科学家已经堆到这里，”她一面说，一面将手举到齐眉的高度。“可是我们欠缺科学和数学人才。契特•夫铭曾向我指出这点，他称之为科学的没落，而且似乎认为这是普遍的现象。”
谢顿说：“当然，我说自己过去该对历史多下工夫，不是指将它当成我的终身事业。我的意思是说，我应该获取足够的知识，用来帮助我的数学研究。我的专长领域是社会结构的数学分析。”
“听来真可怕。”
“从某方面来说，一点也没错。它非常复杂，我必须对社会演化知道得比现在多许多，否则根本没希望。你可知道，我提出的图像过分静态。”
“我看不出来，因为我对这方而一窍不通。契特告诉过我，你在发展一种叫什么心理史学的理论，说这是很重要的一项工作。我说对了吗？心理史学？”
“说得没错，我当初应该称之为‘心理社会学’，但我感到这个名字太别扭。或者，也许我曾直觉地想到历史知识有绝对必要性，可是未曾足够注意自己的心思。”
“心理史学的确比较顺口，但我不懂它究竟是什么。”
“我自己也几乎不懂。”谢顿出神沉思了几分钟。他望着餐桌对面这位女子，觉得她或许会让他这次流亡变得比较不像流亡。他又想到几年前认识的另一名女子，但随即猛然甩开这个念头。假如他再结识一个伴侣，这个她一定要对学术有所认识，并了解从事学术研究应该付出多少。
为了将心思转到另一条轨道，他说：“契特•夫铭告诉我，这所人学绝不会遭到政府的侵扰。”
“他说得没错。”
谢顿摇了摇头：“帝国政府这种雅量似乎令人难以置信，赫利肯的教育机构绝不可能如此免于政府的压力。”
“在锡纳上也不可能，其他外星世界都一样，或许只有一两个最大的世界例外。川陀则另当别论。”
“没错，可是为什么呢？”
“因为它是帝国的中心，此地的大学全都享有极高声誉。任何地方的大学都能培养再专业人才，可是帝国的行政官员——包括那些高官，以及无数代表帝国伸入银河各个角落的触须下——全都是在川陀接受教育的。”
“我从来没看过统计——”谢顿的话只说了一半。
“相信我的话。让帝国官员具有相同的背景、对帝国有特殊的感情，是十分重要的一件事。他们不能全部是川陀本地人，否则会令外星世界感到不安。由于这个缘故，川陀必须吸引数百万外星人士来此接受教育。不论他们来自何处、他们的母星口音或文化如何都不重要，只要他们接受川陀的熏陶，并认同自己的川陀教育背景。帝国就这样凝聚起来了。这样，代表帝国政府的行政官员有不少是外星世界的同胞，不论他们是生在外星还是长在外星，外星世界也就变得不难统治了。”
谢顿再次觉得脸红，这种事他以前从未想过。他不禁产生一个疑惑：如果某人仅只精通一门数学，是否能成为真正伟大的数学家。“这是众所周知的知识吗？”他问。
“我想不是的，”铎丝思考了一下才回答，“需要吸收的知识太多，所以专家一律紧守自己的专长，将它当做一面盾牌，以免需要知晓任何其他方面的任何知识。他们总是想避免被知识淹没。”
“但你却知道。”
“那可是我的专长。我是个历史学家，专门研究王国川陀的兴起。川陀能够不断扩张势力，进而从王国川陀跃升至‘帝国川陀’，这种行政管理技巧就是它的法门之一。”
谢顿几乎是喃喃自语地说：“过度专业化的害处多大呀，它将知识切割成百万碎片，让它到处在滴血。”
铎丝耸了耸肩：“又能怎么办呢？不过你要知道，既然川陀想要吸引外星人士进入川陀各大学，就必须给他们一些回报，以便补偿他们离乡背井，来到一个具有不可思议的人工建筑、生活方式极其特殊的陌生世界。我在此地已有两年，而我仍旧不习惯，也许永远无法习惯。话又说回来，当然，我并不想成为行政官员，所以不会强迫自己变成川陀人。
“川陀所提供的交换条件，不仅是保证一个地位崇高的职位、可观的权势，以及想当然的财富，除此之外还有自由。学生在此接受教育时，他们有自由公开抨击政府，进行和平的反政府示威，提出他们自己的理论和观点。他们很喜欢这种特权，很多人来到此地的目的，就是为了体验自由的滋味。”
“我猜想，”谢顿说，“这也有助于减轻压力。在这段期间，他们将内心的愤恨发泄殆尽，沉溺于年轻革命家的一切自大自满，等他们在帝国体制中谋得一官半职后，就很容易变得既温顺又服从。”
铎丝点了点头：“你也许说对了。无论如何，政府为了这许多原因，总是谨慎地保持每所大学的自由。这根本不是他们有什么雅量，只能算是精明罢了。”
“如果你不想成为行政官员，铎丝，你准备做什么呢？”
“历史学家。我准备教书，将我自己的胶卷书做成教材。”
“只怕不会有太高的地位。”
“也不会有太高的薪水，哈里，这点更重要。至于地位，那是一种吃力不讨好的东西，我避之唯恐不及。我见过许多拥有地位的人，但至今没找到一个快乐的。地位不会被你稳稳坐在下面，你必须不停奋斗才能保持不坠。即使贵为皇帝，也大多没什么好下场。有一天我可能就这么回到锡纳，在那里当一名教授。”
“而川陀的教育背景会让你有地位。”
铎丝笑了几声：“我想是吧，可是在锡纳，谁又会在乎呢？它是一个枯燥无聊的世界，到处都是农场，有许多牛群，四只脚的、两只脚的都不缺。”
“来过川陀之后，你不会觉得它枯燥无聊吗？”
“没错，我也这么想。假使日子太无聊了，我总有办法弄到一笔经费，随便到哪里去做点历史研究。这是我这一行的好处。”
“反之，一个数学家，”谢顿带着一丝前所未有的苦涩说，“却被认定应该坐在计算机前思考。提到计算机……”他迟疑了一下。早餐已经结束，他觉得铎丝必然有些自己的事情需要处理。
但她似乎没有急着离开的意思。“怎么样？提到计算机？”
“我能不能获准使用历史图书馆？”
现在轮到她迟疑了，“我想应该可以安排。若是你接下数学程序设计的工作，或许就能被视为准教员，我可以帮助你申请许可。只不过……”
“只不过？”
“我不想让你心里不舒服，但你是一名数学家，而且你说你对历史一无所知。你会知道如何使用历史图书馆吗？”
谢顿微微一笑：“我想你们使用的计算机，应该和数学图书馆的很接近吧。”
“这点没错，可是每个专业所用的程序都有自己的行话。你不知道什么是标准参考胶卷书，不知道快速筛选和跳读的方法。你也许闭着眼睛都能找到一个双曲微分……”
“你是说双曲积分。”谢顿轻声捅嘴。
铎丝并未理会他：“可是你也许不知道，如何在不到一天半的时间内，查到波达克条约的详细条款。”
“我想我能学。”
“如果……如果……”她看来有些难以启齿，“如果你真要学，我可以做个建议。我负责一个为期一周的课程——每天一小时，没有学分——教授图书馆的使用方法，它是为大学部学生开的。要是让你旁听这种课程，我的意思是跟大学部的学生一起，你会不会觉得拉不下脸？它在三周后开始。”
“你可以私下为我授课。”暗示性的语调闯入谢顿的声音，令他自己都感到有些惊讶。
她并未忽略这一点：“我相信绝无问题，但我认为较正式的授课对你比较好。你要了解，我们上课时会使用图书馆，而在一周结束后，我会要你们找出某个特定历史问题的相关资料。从头到尾，你都得跟其他学生竞争，这将有助于你的学习。私下授课的效率会差得多，我向你保证。然而我了解跟其他大学生竞争的难处，假如你做得没他们好，你会感到无地自容。不过，你必须记住一点，他们已经修过基本历史，而你，说不定，也许没有修过。”
“不是‘也许’而已，我真的没修过。可是我不会害怕竞争，也不在乎可能发生的难堪窘境——只要我能学到查询历史参考数据的决窍。”
谢顿心里很清楚，他已经喜欢上这个年轻女子，很高兴抓住这个机会当她的学生。他也察觉到一件事实，那就是他的心灵正面临一个转折点。
他已经答应夫铭，将试图发展出实用的心理史学，但那只是理智所做的承诺，与情感毫无关系。如今为了将理论化为实际，他决心与心理史学斗个你死我活——假若必须如此的话。而这个转变，也许就是受到铎丝•凡纳比里的影响。
或者夫铭早就料到这点？夫铭这个人，谢顿判断，很可能是个最可怕的人物。
Chapter 19
Cleon I had finished dinner, which, unfortunately, had been a formal state affair. It meant he had to spend time talking to various officials--not one of whom he knew or recognized--in set phrases designed to give each one his stroke and so activate his loyalty to the crown. It also meant that his food reached him but lukewarm and had cooled still further before he could eat it. There had to be some way of avoiding that. Eat first, perhaps, on his own or with one or two close intimates with whom he could relax and then attend a formal dinner at which he could merely be served an imported pear. He loved pears. But would that offend the guests who would take the Emperors refusal to eat with them as a studied insult.
His wife, of course, was useless in this respect, for her presence would but further exacerbate his unhappiness. He had married her because she was a member of a powerful dissident family who could be expected to mute their dissidence as a result of the union, though Cleon devoutly hoped that she, at least, would not do so. He was perfectly content to have her live her own life in her own quarters except for the necessary efforts to initiate an heir, for, to tell the truth, he didnt like her. And now that an heir had come, he could ignore her completely.
He chewed at one of a handful of nuts he had pocketed from the table on leaving and said, "Demerzel!"
"Sire?"
Demerzel always appeared at once when Cleon called. Whether he hovered constantly in earshot at the door or he drew close because the instinct of subservience somehow alerted him to a possible call in a few minutes, he did appear and that, Cleon thought idly, was the important thing. Of course, there were those times when Demerzel had to be away on Imperial business. Cleon always hated those absences. They made him uneasy.
"What happened to that mathematician? I forget his name."
Demerzel, who surely knew the man the Emperor had in mind, but who perhaps wanted to study how much the Emperor remembered, said, "What mathematician is it that you have in mind, Sire?"
Cleon waved an impatient hand. "The fortune-teller. The one who came to see me."
"The one we sent for?"
"Well, sent for, then. He did come to see me. You were going to take care of the matter, as I recall. Have you?"
Demerzel cleared his throat. "Sire, I have tried to."
"Ah! That means you have failed, doesnt it?" In a way, Cleon felt pleased. Demerzel was the only one of his Ministers who made no bones of failure. The others never admitted failure, and since failure was nevertheless common, it became difficult to correct. Perhaps Demerzel could afford to be more honest because he failed so rarely. If it werent for Demerzel, Cleon thought sadly, he might never know what honesty sounded like. Perhaps no Emperor ever knew and perhaps that was one of the reasons that the Empire-- He pulled his thoughts away and, suddenly nettled at the others silence and wanting an admission, since he had just admired Demerzels honesty in his mind, said sharply, "Well, you have failed, havent you?"
Demerzel did not flinch. "Sire, I have failed in part. I felt that to have him here on Trantor where things are--difficult might present us with problems. It was easy to consider that he might be more conveniently placed on his home planet. He was planning to return to that home planet the next day, but there was always the chance of complications--of his deciding to remain on Trantor--so I arranged to have two young alley men place him on his plane that very day."
"Do you know alley men, Demerzel?" Cleon was amused.
"It is important, Sire, to be able to reach many kinds of people, for each type has its own variety of use--alley men not the least. As it happens, they did not succeed."
"And why was that?"
"Oddly enough, Seldon was able to fight them off."
"The mathematician could fight?"
"Apparently, mathematics and the martial arts are not necessarily mutually exclusive. I found out, not soon enough, that his world, Helicon, is noted for it--martial arts, not mathematics. The fact that I did not learn this earlier was indeed a failure, Sire, and I can only crave your pardon."
"But then, I suppose the mathematician left for his home planet the next day as he had planned."
"Unfortunately, the episode backfired. Taken aback by the event, he decided not to return to Helicon, but remained on Trantor. He may have been advised to this effect by a passerby who happened to be present on the occasion of the fight. That was another unlooked-for complication."
The Emperor Cleon frowned. "Then our mathematician--what is his name?"
"Seldon, Sire. Hari Seldon."
"Then this Seldon is out of reach."
"In a sense, Sire. We have traced his movements and he is now at Streeling University. While there, he is untouchable."
The Emperor scowled and reddened slightly. "I am annoyed at that word--untouchable. There should be nowhere in the Empire my hand cannot reach. Yet here, on my own world, you tell me someone can be untouchable. Insufferable!"
"Your hand can reach to the University, Sire. You can send in your army and pluck out this Seldon at any moment you desire. To do so, however, is ... undesirable."
"Why dont you say impractical, Demerzel. You sound like the mathematician speaking of his fortune-telling. It is possible, but impractical. I am an Emperor who finds everything possible, but very little practical. Remember, Demerzel, if reaching Seldon is not practical, reaching you is entirely so."
Eto Demerzel let this last comment pass. The "man behind the throne" knew his importance to the Emperor, he had heard such threats before. He waited in silence while the Emperor glowered.
Drumming his fingers against the arm of his chair, Cleon asked, ... Well then, what good is this mathematician to us if he is at Streeling University?"
"It may perhaps be possible, Sire, to snatch use out of adversity. At the University, he may decide to work on his psychohistory."
"Even though he insists its impractical?"
"He may be wrong and he may find out that he is wrong. And if he finds out that he is wrong, we would find some way of getting him out of the University. It is even possible he would join us voluntarily under those circumstances."
The Emperor remained lost in thought for a while, then said, "And what if someone else plucks him out before we do?"
"Who would want to do that, Sire?" asked Demerzel softy.
"The Mayor of Wye, for one," said Cleon, suddenly shouting. "He dreams still of taking over the Empire."
"Old age has drawn his fangs, Sire."
"Dont you believe it, Demerzel."
"And we have no reason for supposing he has any interest in Seldon or even knows of him, Sire."
"Come on, Demerzel. If we heard of the paper, so could Wye. If we see the possible importance of Seldon, so could Wye."
"If that should happen," said Demerzel, "or even if there should be a reasonable chance of its happening, then we would be justified in taking strong measures."
"How strong?"
Demerzel said cautiously, "It might be argued that rather than have Seldon in Wyes hands, we might prefer to have him in no ones hands. To have him cease to exist, Sire."
"To have him killed, you mean," said Cleon.
"If you wish to put it that way, Sire," said Demerzel.
第十九章
　　克里昂一世刚用完晚膳，这一餐不幸又是正式的国宴。这就代表他必须花上许多时间，对各部门的官员（没有一个是他认识或熟悉的）说些程式化的言辞，为的是让每个人感到如沐春风，以激励他们对皇室的忠心。这也使得食物送到他面前时只剩一点余温，而在他入口时又凉了许多。
一定有什么办法能避免这种情形。也许他应该自己一个人，或是跟一两个可以让他无拘无束的亲信先行用餐，然后再去参加正式晚宴。到时面前只需要摆一个他嗜爱的进口梨子。但是这样会不会冒犯客人，让他们认为皇上拒绝与他们共餐，是一种刻意的羞辱？
当然，在这方面，他的妻子没有任何用处，她的出现只会令他恶劣的心情更加恶化。当初他会娶她为妻，只因她出身于一个势力强大的异议家族，经由这次联姻，便可指望他们暂时装聋作哑，不再坚持反对立场。不过克里昂衷心希望，至少她个人不会跟他作对。他万分满意于让她在她自己的寝宫中过自己的生活，只有必须制造一个子嗣时例外，因为老实说，他并不喜欢她。如今，既然继位者已经出世，他可以将她完全抛到脑后。
在离开餐桌前，他随手抓了一把胡桃放进口袋。此时他一面嚼着胡桃，一面喊道：“丹莫茨尔！”
“陛下。”
丹莫茨尔总是在克里昂叫唤后立刻现身。不论是他始终在听力范围之内徘徊，或是由于奉承的本能，使他警觉到几分钟后可能会受到召唤，因而及时走到近处，反正他就是出现了——而这点才是最重要的事，克里昂无端冒出这个念头。当然，有时丹莫茨尔也得为帝国的事务四处奔走。克里昂一向痛恨那种日子，丹莫茨尔不在身旁总是使他心神不宁。
“那个数学家怎么样啦？我忘了他的名字。”
丹莫茨尔当然知道皇下指谁，但他或许是要试探一下皇上还记得多少。“您指的是哪个数学家，陛下？”
克里昂挥挥手表示不耐烦：“那个算命的，那个来见过我的。”
“我们请来的那位？”
“好吧，就算是请来的，但他的确来见过我。我记得你说过要处理这桩事，办了没有？”
丹莫茨尔清了清喉咙：“陛下，我尽了力。”
“啊！这么说你是失败了，是不是？”从某个角度而言，克里昂感到很高兴。在所有部会首长中，丹莫茨尔是唯一绝不掩饰失败的人。其他人从不会承认失败，然而由于失败是常有的事，因此变得难以改正。或许丹莫茨尔不怕表现得比较诚实，是因为他鲜有失败的时候。要不是有丹莫茨尔，克里昂难过地寻思，自己可能永远不知诚实为何物。也许没有一个皇帝知道，而诸如此类的事情，便是帝国……
他及时将思绪拉回，对方的沉默突然令他恼羞成怒。他想要听到一句承认的话语，因为他刚在心中赞许过丹莫茨尔的减实。他尖声说道：“嗯，你已经失败了，对不对？”
丹莫茨尔并未胆怯：“陛下，在某些地方，我是失败了。我感到若是让他留在川陀，此地的情势颇为——困难。可能会给我们带来麻烦。于是我不难想到，将他放在他的母星应该比较容易处理。他当时计划要次日回到母星，但总有机会突生变故，让他又决定留在川陀，所以我找来两个街头小混混，准备当天就把他押上太空船。”
“你认识街头混混吗，丹莫茨尔？”克里昂的兴趣来了。
“有办法找到各式各样的人，陛下，是一种很重要的能力，因为每种人都有各自不同的用处——街头混混的用处也不少。结果，没想到他们并未成功。”
“为什么会这样？”
“可真奇怪，谢顿竟然有本事打退他们。”
“那个数学家能打？”
“显然，数学和武术并不一定抵触。直到后来我才发现，他的世界赫利肯在这方面十分有名——我是指武术，不是数学。我未能及早知晓这件事，确实要算我的疏失，陛下，如今我只能恳求您恕罪。”
“可是这样的话，我想那个数学家应该按照他的原定计划，隔天便启程回他的母星去啦。”
“不幸的是，这个插曲反倒弄巧成拙。由于受到这件事的惊吓，他决定暂时不回赫利肯，而要继续留在川陀。他可能是接受了一个路人的劝告，才会做出这个决定，那人在他们打架时刚好在场。这是另一个意料之外的发展。”
克里昂大帝皱起眉头：“那么我们这位数学家——他叫什么名字？”
“谢顿，哈里•谢顿，陛下。”
“那么，这个谢顿脱离我们的掌握了。”
“可以这么说，陛下。我们已经追查到他的行踪，他如今在川陀大学。当他躲在那里的时候，我们根本碰不了他。”
皇上面露不悦之色，脸庞微微涨红。“我不喜欢这个词——碰不了。在整个帝国之中，不该有任何地方是我无法掌握的。然而在此地，在我自己的世界上，你却告诉我有人是碰不了的。简直令人无法忍受！’‘“您的手掌能伸进那所大学，陛下。您随时可以派遣您的军队，把这个谢顿从那里揪出来。然而这样做的话，会……不受欢迎。”
“为何不干脆说‘不可行’，丹莫茨尔？你这番话听来就像那个数学家在讲他的命相术，它是可能的，但实际上却不可行：我这个皇帝也发现一切都有可能，却很少有实际可行的事。别忘了，丹莫茨尔，如果逮捕谢帧不可行，逮捕你却易如反掌。”
伊图•丹莫茨尔并未将最后一句话放在心上。这位“皇位后的掌权者”知道自己对皇帝的重要性，而且以前他也听过这种威胁。当皇上吹胡子瞪眼的时候，他只是默默等在一旁。
克里昂一面用手指敲打着座椅扶手，一面问道：“好吧，如果那个数学家藏在川陀大学，他对我们又能有什么用？”
“绝处逢生后有可能柳暗花明，陛下。在那所大学里，他或许会决心发展他的心理史学。”
“即使他坚持它实际上不可行？”
“他或许错了，也有可能会发现自己错了。如果他发现错在自己，我们就设法把他弄出那所大学。在那种情况下，他甚至可能会自愿加入我们。”
皇上陷入沉思好一阵子，然后说：“如果有人抢先一步把他弄走，那又该怎么办？”
“谁会想要那么做呢？”丹莫茨尔轻声问道。
“比如说卫荷区长！”克里昂突然高声喊道：“他仍旧梦想接掌帝国。”
“年岁已将他消磨殆尽，陛下。”
“你不会相信这种说法吧，丹莫茨尔。”
“我们没有理由假设他对谢顿有任何兴趣，或者听说过这个人，陛下。”
“得了吧，丹莫茨尔。既然我们听说了那篇论文，卫荷也能风闻。既然我们看出谢顿潜在的重要性，卫荷同样看得出来。”
“要是真发生这种事，”丹莫茨尔说，“甚至只是有若干机会可能发生，我们就有正当理由采取激烈手段。”
“多激烈？”
丹莫茨尔小心翼翼地答道：“可以这么说，与其让谢顿落入卫荷手中，我们宁愿让他无法落入任何人的掌握。让他终止存在，陛下。”
“你的意思是杀了他。”克里昂说。
“如果您希望那样表达的话，陛下。”丹莫茨尔答道。
Chapter 20
Hari Seldon sat back in his chair in the alcove that had been assigned  to him through Dors Venabilis intervention. He was dissatisfied. As a  matter of fact, although that was the expression he used in his mind, he  knew that it was a gross underestimation of his feelings. He was not  simply dissatisfied, he was furious--all the more so because he wasnt  sure what it was he was furious about. Was it about the histories? The  writers and compilers of histories? The worlds and people that made the  histories? Whatever the target of his fury, it didnt really matter. What  counted was that his notes were useless, his new knowledge was useless,  everything was useless. He had been at the University now for almost  six weeks. He had managed to find a computer outlet at the very start  and with it had begun work--without instruction, but using the instincts  he had developed over a number of years of mathematical labors. It had  been slow and halting, but there was a certain pleasure in gradually  determining the routes by which he could get his questions answered.
Then came the week of instruction with Dors, which had taught him  several dozen shortcuts and had brought with it two sets of  embarrassments. The first set included the sidelong glances he received  from the undergraduates, who seemed contemptuously aware of his greater  age and who were disposed to frown a bit at Dorss constant use of the  honorific "Doctor" in addressing him. "I dont want them to think," she  said, "that youre some backward perpetual student taking remedial  history."
"But surely youve established the point. Surely, a mere Seldon is sufficient now."
"No," Dors said and smiled suddenly. "Besides, I like to call you Dr. Seldon. I like the way you look uncomfortable each time."
"You have a peculiar sense of sadistic humor."
"Would you deprive me?"
For some reason, that made him laugh. Surely, the natural reaction would  have been to deny sadism. Somehow he found it pleasant that she  accepted the ball of conversation and fired it back. The thought led to a  natural question. "Do you play tennis here at the University?"
"We have courts, but I dont play."
"Good. Ill teach you. And when I do, Ill call you Professor Venabili."
"Thats what you call me in class anyway."
"Youll be surprised how ridiculous it will sound on the tennis court."
"I may get to like it."
"In that case, I will try to find what else you might get to like."
"I see you have a peculiar sense of salacious humor."
She had put that ball in that spot deliberately and he said, "Would you deprive me?"
She smiled and later did surprisingly well on the tennis court.
"Are you sure you never played tennis?" he said, puffing, after one session.
"Positive," she said.
The other set of embarrassments was more private. He learned the  necessary techniques of historical research and then burned--in  private--at his earlier attempts to make use of the computers memory. It  was simply an entirely different mind-set from that used in  mathematics. It was equally logical, he supposed, since it could be  used, consistently and without error, to move in whatever direction he  wanted to, but it was a substantially different brand of logic from that  to which he was accustomed.
But with or without instructions, whether he stumbled or moved in swiftly, he simply didnt get any results.
His annoyance made itself felt on the tennis court. Dors quickly reached  the stage where it was no longer necessary to lob easy balls at her to  give her time to judge direction and distance. That made it easy to  forget that she was just a beginner and he expressed his anger in his  swing, firing the ball back at her as though it were a laser beam made  solid.
She came trotting up to the net and said, "I can understand your wanting  to kill me, since it must annoy you to watch me miss the shots so  often. How is it, though, that you managed to miss my head by about  three centimeters that time? I mean, you didnt even nick me. Cant you do  better than that?"
Seldon, horrified, tried to explain, but only managed to sound incoherent.
She said, "Look. Im not going to face any other returns of yours today,  so why dont we shower and then get together for some tea and whatever  and you can tell me just what you were trying to kill. If it wasnt my  poor head and if you dont get the real victim off your chest, youll be  entirely too dangerous on the other side of the net for me to want to  serve as a target."
Over tea he said, "Dors, Ive scanned history after history; just  scanned, browsed. I havent had time for deep study yet. Even so, its  become obvious. All the book-films concentrate on the same few events."
"Crucial ones. History-making ones."
"Thats just an excuse. Theyre copying each other. There are twenty-five  million worlds out there and theres significant mention of perhaps  twenty-five."
Dors said, "Youre reading general Galactic histories only. Look up the  special histories of some of the minor worlds. On every world, however  small, the children are taught local histories before they ever find out  theres a great big Galaxy outside. Dont you yourself know more about  Helicon, right now, than you know about the rise of Trantor oooof the  Great Interstellar War?"
"That sort of knowledge is limited too," said Seldon gloomily. "I know  Heliconian geography and the stories of its settlement and of the  malfeasance and misfeasance of the planet Jennisek--thats our  traditional enemy, though our teachers carefully told us that we ought  to say traditional rival. But I never learned anything about the  contributions of Helicon to general Galactic history."
"Maybe there werent any."
"Dont be silly. Of course there were. There may not have been great,  huge space battles involving Helicon or crucial rebellions or peace  treaties. There may not have been some Imperial competitor making his  base on Helicon. But there must have been subtle influences. Surely,  nothing can happen anywhere without affecting everywhere else. Yet  theres nothing I can find to help me. See here, Dors. In mathematics,  all can be found in the computer; everything we know or have found out  in twenty thousand years. In history, thats not so. Historians pick and  choose and every one of them picks and chooses the same thing."
"But, Hari," said Dors, "mathematics is an ooderly thing of human  invention. One thing follows from another. There are definitions and  axioms, all of which are known. It is ... it is ... all one piece.  History is different. It is the unconscious working out of the deeds and  thoughts of quadrillions of human beings. Historians must pick and  choose."
"Exactly," said Seldon, "but I must know all of history if I am to work out the laws of psychohistory."
"In that case, you wont ever formulate the laws of psychohistory."
That was yesterday. Now Seldon sat in his chair in his alcove, having  spent another day of utter failure, and he could hear Dorss voice  saying, "In that case, you wont ever formulate the laws of  psychohistory." It was what he had thought to begin with and if it hadnt  been for Hummins conviction to the contrary and his odd ability to fire  Seldon with his own blaze of conviction, Seldon would have continued to  think so. And yet neither could he quite let go. Might there not be  some way out?
He couldnt think of any.
Upperside
TRANTOR-- ... It is almost never pictured as a world seen from space. It  has long since captured the general mind of humanity as a world of the  interior and the image is that of the human hive that existed under the  domes. Yet there was an exterior as well and there are holographs that  still remain that were taken from space and show varying degrees of  [devil] (see Figures 14 and 15). Note that the surface of the domes, the  interface of the vast city and the overlying atmosphere, a surface  referred to in its time as "Upperside," is ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第二十章
　　哈里•谢顿待在铎丝•凡纳比里帮他在图书馆争取到的一间凹室中，他靠在一张椅子上，心中感到很不满意。
事实上，虽然那正是他心中使用的词汇，他也知道“不满意”实在太过低估如今的感觉。他不只是不满意，简直就是愤怒。而他又不确定到底为何愤怒，更为心中这股怒焰火上加油。是在气历史吗？还是气那些史书的作者与编者？或是创造历史的各个世界与全体人类？
不论他发怒的对象究竟为何，其实都没什么关系。重要的是他做的笔记没有用，他学到的新知识没有用，一切的一切都没有用。
如今，他来到这所大学已接近六周。一开始他就设法找到一套计算机终端机，利用它展开工作——没有任何人指导，仅靠钻研数学多年所累积的直觉。进度虽然缓慢，而且并不顺利，不过渐渐发现循哪条路径便能摸索出问题的答案，其中也自有一番乐趣。
后来，铎丝教授的一周课程开始了，这门课教给他数十种快捷方式，同时带来了两种尴尬的窘境。其一包括那些大学生斜眼看人，似乎因为察觉到他的年龄而瞧不起他：每当铎丝频频使用“博士”的尊衔称呼他，他们全都会稍微皱皱眉头。
“我不希望他们认为，”她说，“你是个一直毕不了业的老学生，正在补修历史课程。”
“但你显然已经表明这一点，现在只要叫我‘谢顿’就够了。”
“不行。”铎丝突然露出笑容，“此外，我喜欢叫你‘谢顿博士，我喜欢看你露出那种不自在的表情。”
“你有一种虐待狂的幽默感。”
“你要剥夺我的乐趣吗？”
不知道为什么，这句话使他开怀大笑。不用说，一般人的反应当然是否认自己有虐待狂，而她却接下这个“杀球”，并且立即予以反击，他觉得实在好玩。这个想法自然而然引发了一个问题：“你在学校打不打网球？”
“我们有网球场，但我不会打。”
“很好，我来教你。当我教你打球的时候，我会称呼你凡纳比里教授。”
“反正你在课堂上就是这样称呼我的。”
“你不会相信在网球场上听来有多么滑稽。”
“我可能会喜欢。”
“这样的话，我会试图找出你还可能喜欢些什么。”
“我发现你有一种色情狂的幽默感。”
她故意把这记杀球打到同一个地方，于是他说：“你要剥夺我的乐趣吗？”
她微笑不语。
后来，她在网球场上表现得出奇优异。“你确定自己从没打过网球？”练完一回合之后，他喘着气问道。
“确定。”她说。
另一种窘境比较属于私人性质。当他学会历史数据查询的必要技巧，刚开始试着使用计算机内存的时候，曾经（私底下）碰了一鼻子灰。那根本是与数学界全然不同的思考模式。他认为它应该同样合乎逻辑，因为它可以毫无矛盾、毫无错误地根据他的心意四通八达，可是这种逻辑与他熟悉的那套分属完全不同的品牌。
但不论有没有人指导，不论是窒碍难行或迅速进入，他就是得不出任何结果。
他的恼怒在网球场上露出痕迹。铎丝很快就有长足的进步，他不需再为了给她时间判断来球的方向与距离，而喂给她好打的高吊球。这使他很容易忘掉她只是个初学者，于是他将愤怒发泄在挥拍动作上，将球使劲向她击去，那球仿佛成了一道固体的激光束。
她小跑步来到网前：“我能了解你为什么想要‘杀’我，我漏接那么频繁，一定让你非常恼火。可是，为什么你要让球偏离我的脑袋三厘米？我的意思是说，你甚至没打中我的汗毛，你难道不能杀得更好一点？”
谢顿吓呆了，忙想解释，却只说出一串语无伦次的话。
她说：“听着，今天我不想再接你的球了。所以说，我们何不这就去淋浴，再一起喝杯茶什么的，然后你可以告诉我，你想要杀掉的究竟是什么。如果不是我这颗可怜的脑袋，又如果你不将元凶从心头拔除，那么让你站在网子另一边，再把我当成你的靶子，对我而言实在太危险了。”
喝茶的时候，他说：“铎丝，我已经扫描过无数的历史，只是扫描、浏览而已，我还没时间做深入研究。即使如此。有件事已经十分明显，所有的胶卷书都集中于相同的少数事件。”
“关键的事件，创造历史的事件。”
“那只是个借口，其实它们相互抄袭。银河共有两千五百万个世界，记载详细的也许只有二十五个。”
铎丝说：“你读的都只是银河通史，应该查查某些小世界的特殊历史。在每个世界上，不论它多么小，学童也要先学本星历史，然后才会知晓外面还有个庞大的银河。此时此刻，你自己对赫利肯的了解，难道不比对川陀的兴起或‘星际大战’更多吗？”
“那种知识也有局限，”谢顿以沮丧的口吻说，“我知道赫利肯的地理、它的开拓史，以及詹尼瑟克这颗行星的恶行恶状——那个世界是我们的传统敌人，不过我们老师曾特别嘱咐，说我们应该称之为‘传统的对手’。可是，我从来没学到赫利肯对银河通史有什么贡献。”
“或许根本没有。”
“别傻了，当然有。也许赫利肯未曾卷入任何大型的太空战事、重大的叛乱事件，或是重要的和平条约；也许没有哪个皇位竞逐者曾以赫利肯为基地，不过一些微妙的影响一定存在。不用说，任何一处发生的事件，都会对其他各个角落造成影响。但我找不到对我有任何帮助的数据——听我说，铎丝，在数学领域里，所有的一切都能在计算机中找到，包括过去两万年来我们所知道的或发现的。但历史界则不然，历史学家总是挑挑拣拣，而且每个人全都挑拣相同的东西。”
“可是，哈里，”铎丝说，“数学是人类发明的秩序结构，一样东西紧紧扣着另外一样。其中有定义，有公设，所有这些都是已知的。它是……它是……一个整体。历史则不同，是万兆人口的思想和行为所形成的无意识结构，历史学家必须挑挑拣拣。”
“正是如此。”谢顿说，“但是若想推出心理史学定律，我必须知晓全部的历史。”
“那样的话，你将永远无法写下心理史学定律。”
那已是昨天的事情。谢顿此刻正颓然坐在凹室中的椅子上，他又花了一整天的时间，但却毫无所获。他仿佛又听见铎丝的声音：“那样的话，你将永远无法写下心理史学定律。”
这正是他最初的想法。要不是夫铭坚决相信并非如此，若非他具有奇异的能力，将他的信念像火焰般喷到谢顿身上，谢顿会一直持有同样的想法。
然而进退他都无法真正接受。难道就没有任何出路吗？
他想不出任何解决之道。
Chapter 21
Yet the following day found Hari Seldon back in the library. For one thing, there was his promise to Hummin. He had promised to try and he couldnt very well make it a halfhearted process. For another, he owed something to himself too. He resented having to admit failure. Not yet, at least. Not while he could plausibly tell himself he was following up leads. So he stared at the list of reference book-films he had not yet checked through and tried to decide which of the unappetizing number had the slightest chance of being useful to him. He had about decided that the answer was "none of the above" and saw no way out but to look at samples of each when he was startled by a gentle tap against the alcove wall.
Seldon looked up and found the embarrassed face of Lisung Randa peering at him around the edge of the alcove opening. Seldon knew Randa, had been introduced to him by Dors, and had dined with him (and with others) on several occasions. Randa, an instructor in psychology, was a little man, short and plump, with a round cheerful face and an almost perpetual smile. He had a sallow complexion and the narrowed eyes so characteristic of people on millions of worlds. Seldon knew that appearance well, for there were many of the great mathematicians who had borne it, and he had frequently seen their holograms. Yet on Helicon he had never seen one of these Easterners. (By tradition they were called that, though no one knew why; and the Easterners themselves were said to resent the term to some degree, but again no one knew why.)
"Theres millions of us here on Trantor," Randa had said, smiling with no trace of self-consciousness, when Seldon, on first meeting him, had not been able to repress all trace of startled surprise. "Youll also find lots of Southerners--dark skins, tightly curled hair. Did you ever see one?"
"Not on Helicon," muttered Seldon.
"All Westerners on Helicon, eh? How dull! But it doesnt matter. Takes all kinds." (He left Seldon wondering at the fact that there were Easterners, Southerners, and Westerners, but no Northerners. He had tried finding an answer to why that might be in his reference searches and had not succeeded.) And now Randas good-natured face was looking at him with an almost ludicrous look of concern. He said, "Are you all right, Seldon?"
Seldon stared. "Yes, of course. Why shouldnt I be?"
"Im just going by sounds, my friend. You were screaming."
"Screaming?" Seldon looked at him with offended disbelief.
"Not loud. Like this." Randa gritted his teeth and emitted a strangled high-pitched sound from the back of his throat. "If Im wrong, I apologize for this unwarranted intrusion on you. Please forgive me."
Seldon hung his head. "Youre forgiven, Lisung. I do make that sound sometimes, Im told. I assure you its unconscious. Im never aware of it."
"Are you aware why you make it?"
"Yes. Frustration. Frustration."
Randa beckoned Seldon closer and lowered his voice further. "Were disturbing people. Lets come out to the lounge before were thrown out."
In the lounge, over a pair of mild drinks, Randa said, "May I ask you, as a matter of professional interest, why you are feeling frustration?"
Seldon shrugged. "Why does one usually feel frustration? Im tackling something in which I am making no progress."
"But youre a mathematician, Hari. Why should anything in the history library frustrate you?"
"What were you doing here?"
"Passing through as part of a shortcut to where I was going when I heard you ... moaning. Now you see"--and he smiled--"its no longer a shortcut, but a serious delay--one that I welcome, however."
"I wish I were just passing through the history library, but Im trying to solve a mathematical problem that requires some knowledge of history and Im afraid Im not handling it well."
Randa stared at Seldon with an unusually solemn expression on his face, then he said, "Pardon me, but I must run the risk of offending you now. Ive been computering you."
"Computering me!" Seldons eyes widened. He felt distinctly angry.
"I have offended you. But, you know, I had an uncle who was a mathematician. You might even have heard of him: Kiangtow Randa."
Seldon drew in his breath. "Are you a relative of that Randa?"
"Yes. He is my fathers older brother and he was quite displeased with me for not following in his footsteps--he has no children of his own. I thought somehow that it might please him that I had met a mathematician and I wanted to boast of you--if I could--so I checked what information the mathematics library might have."
"I see. And thats what you were really doing there. Well--Im sorry. I dont suppose you could do much boasting."
"You suppose wrong. I was impressed. I couldnt make heads or tails of the subject matter of your papers, but somehow the information seemed to be very favorable. And when I checked the news files, I found you were at the Decennial Convention earlier this year. So ... whats psychohistory, anyway? Obviously, the first two syllables stir my curiosity."
"I see you got that word out of it."
"Unless Im totally misled, it seemed to me that you can work out the future course of history."
Seldon nodded wearily, "That, more or less, is what psychohistory is or, rather, what it is intended to be."
"But is it a serious study?" Randa was smiling. "You dont just throw sticks?"
"Throw sticks?"
"Thats just a reference to a game played by children on my home planet of Hopara. The game is supposed to tell the future and if youre a smart kid, you can make a good thing out of it. Tell a mother that her child will grow up beautiful and marry a rich man and its good for a piece of cake or a half-credit piece on the spot. She isnt going to wait and see if it comes true; you are rewarded just for saying it."
"I see. No, I dont throw sticks. Psychohistory is just an abstract study. Strictly abstract. It has no practical application at all, except--"
"Now were getting to it. Exceptions are what are interesting."
"Except that I would like to work out such an application. Perhaps if I knew more about history--"
"Ah, that is why you are reading history?"
"Yes, but it does me no good," said Seldon sadly. "There is too much history and there is too little of it that is told."
"And thats whats frustrating you?"
Seldon nodded.
Randa said, "But, Hari, youve only been here a matter of weeks."
"True, but already I can see--"
"You cant see anything in a few weeks. You may have to spend your whole lifetime making one little advance. It may take many generations of work by many mathematicians to make a real inroad on the problem."
"I know that, Lisung, but that doesnt make me feel better. I want to make some visible progress myself."
"Well, driving yourself to distraction wont help either. If it will make you feel better, I can give you an example of a subject much less complex than human history that people have been working for I dont know how long without making much progress. I know because a group is working on it right here at the University and one of my good friends is involved. Talk about frustration! You dont know what frustration is!"
"Whats the subject?" Seldon felt a small curiosity stirring within him.
"Meteorology."
"Meteorology!" Seldon felt revolted at the anticlimax.
"Dont make faces. Look. Every inhabited world has an atmosphere. Every world has its own atmospheric composition, its own temperature range, its own rotation and revolution rate, its own axial tipping, its own land-water distribution. Weve got twenty five million different problems and no one has succeeded in finding a generalization."
"... thats because atmospheric behavior easily enters a chaotic phase. Everyone knows that."
"So my friend Jenarr Leggen says. Youve met him."
Seldon considered. "Tall fellow? Long nose? Doesnt speak much?"
"Thats the one.--And Trantor itself is a bigger puzzle than almost any world. According to the records, it had a fairly normal weather pattern when it was first settled. Then, as the population grew and urbanization spread, more energy was used and more heat was discharged into the atmosphere. The ice cover contracted, the cloud layer thickened, and the weather got lousier. That encouraged the movement underground and set off a vicious cycle. The worse the weather got, the more eagerly the land was dug into and the domes built and the weather got still worse. Now the planet has become a world of almost incessant cloudiness and frequent rains--or snows when its cold enough. The only thing is that no one can work it out properly. No one has worked out an analysis that can explain why the weather has deteriorated quite as it has or how one can reasonably predict the details of its day-to-day changes."
Seldon shrugged. "Is that sort of thing important?"
"To a meteorologist it is. Why cant they be as frustrated over their problems as you are over yours? Dont be a project chauvinist."
Seldon remembered the cloudiness and the dank chill on the way to the Emperors Palace.
He said, "So whats being done about it?"
"Well, theres a big project on the matter here at the University and Jenarr Leggen is part of it. They feel that if they can understand the weather change on Trantor, they will learn a great deal about the basic laws of general meteorology. Leggen wants that as much as you want your laws of psychohistory. So he has set up an incredible array of instruments of all kinds Upperside ... you know, above the domes. It hasnt helped them so far. And if theres so much work being done for many generations on the atmosphere, without results, how can you complain that you havent gotten anything out of human history in a few weeks?"
Randa was right, Seldon thought, and he himself was being unreasonable and wrong. And yet ... and yet ... Hummin would say that this failure in the scientific attack on problems was another sign of the degeneration of the times. Perhaps he was right, also, except that he was speaking of a general degeneration and average effect. Seldon felt no degeneration of ability and mentality in himself.
He said with some interest then, "You mean that people climb up out of the domes and into the open air above?"
"Yes. Upperside. Its a funny thing, though. Most native Trantorians wont do it. They dont like to go Upperside. The idea gives them vertigo or something. Most of those working on the meteorology project are Outworlders."
Seldon looked out of the window and the lawns and small garden of the University campus, brilliantly lit without shadows or oppressive heat, and said thoughtfully, "I dont know that I can blame Trantorians for liking the comfort of being within, but I should think curiosity would drive some Upperside. It would drive me."
"Do you mean that you would like to see meteorology in action?"
"I think I would. How does one get Upperside?"
"Nothing to it. An elevator takes you up, a door opens, and there you are. Ive been up there. Its ... novel."
"It would get my mind off psychohistory for a while." Seldon sighed. "Id welcome that."
"On the other hand," said Randy, "my uncle used to say, All knowledge is one, and he may be right. You may learn something from meteorology that will help you with your psychohistory. Isnt that possible?"
Seldon smiled weakly. "A great many things are possible." And to himself he added: But not practical.
第二十一章
第五部 穹顶上
川陀：……几乎无人从外层空间的角度描绘这个世界。长久以来，在一般人的心目中，它一直是个内部世界，其形象为无数穹顶下的住人巢穴。然而它并非欠缺外部，某些摄自太空、留存至今的全息像，足以显示出不同程度的细节。
请注意那些穹顶的表面——这座庞大的城市与其上大气层的交界……
——《银河百科全书》


第二十一章
不过，哈里•谢顿隔天依旧回到图书馆。一来，他曾经承诺夫铭，答应会尽力一试，他不能随随便便敷衍了事。另一方面，他对自己也有亏欠，他极不愿承认失败，至少不是现在。现在他还可以告诉自己，他正在循着线索前进。
所以，他瞪着一串尚未查阅的参考胶卷书单，试图决定在这些令人倒胃口的编号中，哪一个可能有丝毫用处。在他就要得出一个结论：答案是“以上皆非”，唯有逐个取样翻查时，忽然听到一阵轻敲凹室墙壁的声音，令他不禁吓了一跳。
谢顿抬起头来，看见表情尴尬的李松•阮达正从凹室开口的边缘窥视自己。谢顿认识阮达（是铎丝介绍的），也曾经与他（还有其他一些人）一起吃过几顿饭。
阮达是心理系的讲师，个头很小，身材矮胖，一张圆脸喜气洋洋，几乎永远笑口常开。他拥有淡黄的皮肤与细小的眼睛，那是数百万世界上居民的共同特征。
谢顿对这样的外表相当熟悉，因为许多伟大的数学家都是这种模样，他们的全息像是他常常看到的。但在赫利肯，这些东方人他却从未见过一个。（那是他们传统的称呼，虽然没人知道为什么；据说东方人自己对这个名称也有些反感，不过同样无人知晓原因何在。）
“在川陀，我们这种人有好几百万。”在他们首次见面时，谢顿无法完全压抑讶异的表情，阮达曾经这么说，同时带着毫不羞怯的微笑。“你也会发现很多南方人——黑皮肤，头发很卷。你曾经见过吗？”
“在赫利肯从没见过。”谢顿喃喃答道。
“赫利肯都是西方人，啊？多么单调！不过没关系，各种人都有才热闹嘛。”（这番话使谢顿不禁纳闷，为什么有东方人、南方人与西方人，却偏偏没有北方人。他曾试图从参考数据中找出可能的答案，结果没有任何收获。）
现在，阮达和善的脸庞带着一种近乎滑稽的关切神情对着他。“你还好吧，谢顿？”
谢顿瞪大眼睛：“当然，为什么会不好？”
“我只不过根据声音判断，朋友，你刚才在尖叫。”
“尖叫？”谢顿望着他，一脸不相信又不高兴的表情。
“不是很大声，就像这样——”阮达咬紧两排牙齿，从喉咙后方发出一下掐住脖子的高几声调。“如果我弄错了，我要为这样的无端侵扰致歉，请原谅我。”
谢顿垂下头来：“我不介意，李松。我有时的确会发出那种声音，有人告诉过我、我保证那是无意识的动作，我从来不曾察觉。”
“你明白自己为何这样做吗？”
“明白。因为挫折感，挫折感！”
阮达招手示意谢顿凑近些，并将音量压得更低。“我们打扰了其他人，让我们到休息室去，免得等一下被人轰走。”
在休息室中，喝了两杯淡酒之后，阮达说：“基于职业上的兴趣，我能否请问你，为什么你会有挫折感？”
谢顿耸了耸肩：“通常一个人为什么有挫折感？我在进行一件工作，一直没有任何进展。”
“但你是一位数学家，哈里。历史图书馆有什么东西会让你感到挫折？”
“你又在这里做什么？”
“我经过这里是为了抄近路，结果听到你在……呻吟。现在你看，”他又露出微笑，“这不再是近路，而是严重的耽搁。不过，我倒是挺喜欢这种情况的。”
“我真希望我也只是路过历史图书馆。不过我正试图解决的一个数学问题，需要一些历史学的知识，只怕我没做好这件工作。”
阮达带着难得的严肃表情盯着谢顿，然后说：“对不起，但我必须冒着触怒你的危险——我一直在用计算机查阅你。”
“查阅我！”谢顿的双眼怒睁，极为愤怒。
“我果然触怒了你。不过，你可知道，我有个伯父是数学家。你甚至可能听说过：江涛•阮达。”
谢顿倒抽了一口气：“你是那位阮达的亲戚？”
“没错，他是我父亲的兄长。我没有追随他的脚步，令他相当不高兴——他自己没有子女。于是我想到，要是让他知道我结识了一位数学家，或许他会开心。我想为你吹嘘一番——如果我做得到的话，所以我查询过数学图书馆中的数据。”
“我懂了，这才是你去那里的真正原因。嗯——很抱歉，我想我没什么能让你吹嘘的。”
“你想错了，我相当惊讶。你的论文究竟研究些什么，我连皮毛都看不懂，不过那些数据似乎非常热门。而在我查阅新闻档案时，我发现你曾经出席今年的十年会议。所以……到底什么是‘心理史学’？显然，头两个字挑起了我的好奇心。”
“我相信你看出了字面的意思。”
“除非我完全受到误导，否则在我看来，你似乎能推算出历史的未来轨迹。”
谢顿困倦地点了点头：“这差不多就是心理史学的意义，或者应该说，是它理论上的意图。”
“但它是个严肃的学问吗？”阮达微笑着问道：“你不光是在丢树枝吧？”
“丢树枝？”
“那是在我的母星候帕拉，孩童们所玩的一种游戏。这种游戏是要预测未来，如果你是个聪明的小孩，就能从中得到好处。你只要告诉一位母亲，说她的女儿会长得很漂亮，将来会嫁一个有钱人，就会当场获赠一块蛋糕或半个信用点。她不会等着验证预言的实现，你只要那么说，就能立刻获得奖赏。”
“我懂了。不，我不是在丢树枝。心理史学只是一门抽象的学问，极端抽象。它完全没有实际的应用，除非……”
“现在我们讲到重点了，‘除非’之后总是接着最有趣的部分。”
“除非我愿意发展出这样的应用。或许，假如我对历史多了解些……”
“啊，这就是你研读历史的原因？”
“没错，可是对我并无任何帮助。”谢顿以伤感的口吻说，“历史的范围太广，有记载的部分却太少。”
“这就是让你感到挫折的事？”
谢顿点了点头。
阮达说：“可是，哈里，你来到这里才不过几个星期。”
“是的，但我已经能看出……”
“你不可能在短短几周内看出任何事情。你也许得花上整整一辈子，才能获得一点点进展。想对这个问题真正有所突破，也许需要许多数学家好几代的努力。”
“我也知道，李松，但这并不能让我觉得好过一点。我想要自已做出一些可见的进展。”
“嗯，你把自己逼得精神错乱也无济于事。如果能让你觉得舒服点，我可以告诉你一个例子：有个题目远比人类历史单纯得多，许多人花了不知多少岁月，却一直没有多大进展。我会知道这件事，是因为这所大学就有一组人员在研究这个题目，我的一位好友也参与其中。要说挫折感，你根本不知道什么是挫折感！”《基地前奏》（上）-161.JPG.TXT“是什么题目？”谢顿觉得心中涌起一股小小的好奇。
“气象学。”
“气象学！”对于这个反高潮的答案，谢顿感到有些不悦。
“别扮鬼脸，听我说。每个住人世界都有个大气层；每个世界都有各自的大气成分、各自的温度范围、各自的自转与公转速率、各自的轴倾角，以及各自的水陆分布。我们面对两千五百万个不同的问题，从来没人能找到一条通则。”
“那是因为大气行为很容易进入混沌相，每个人都知道这个道理。”
“我的朋友杰纳尔•里根就是这么说的，你曾经见过他。”
谢顿想了一下：“高个子？长鼻子？不怎么说话？”
“就是他——而且，川陀几乎比其他世界史难理解。根据记录显示，在殖民之初，它具有相当正常的气候模式。然后，随着人口增长，以及都市范围的扩张，能量的消耗不断增加，越来越多的热量排放到大气中。于是覆冰逐渐收缩，云层逐渐变厚，天气则越变越糟。这便促使居民转向地底发展，形成一个恶性循环。气候越差，居民越是急于掘地和建造穹顶，因而气候变得更差。如今，整个行星几乎经年累月乌云密布，而且常常下雨——或是下雪，如果温度够低。只不过没有人做出适当的解释，没有人做出正确的分析，解释天气为何恶化到这种程度，或是合理地预测每天的变化详情。”
谢顿耸了耸肩：“这种事很重要吗？”
“对一位气象学家而言，是的。他们为什么不像你一样，为自己所面对的问题心生挫折？别做个自我中心的沙文主义者。”
谢顿想起通往皇宫的路上，那种乌云密布、潮湿阴冷的情形。
他说：“那么，目前做到了什么程度？”
“嗯，有个庞大的研究计划在本校进行，杰纳尔•里根是负责人之一。他们觉得若能了解川陀的气候变化，便可对气象学的基本定律获得许多进一步认识。里根渴望找出那些定律，就像你想找出心理史学定律一样。因此，他在穹顶之上架设了一个由各式各样仪器组成的巨大数组。直到目前为止，他们还没什么收获。既然许多代的气象学家，花了无数心血在大气问题上，却始终没有具体的成果，你花上几周时间，未能从人类历史中研究出什么，又有什么好抱怨的呢！”
阮达说得没错，谢顿想，是他自己欠缺理智，态度错误。然而……然而……夫铭会说这项科学研究的失败，是这个时代走下坡的另一个迹象。或许他也是对的，只不过他指的是一般性退化与平均效应，谢顿并未感到自己的能力与智力有任何退化。
他以略带兴趣的口吻说：“你的意思是，他们爬到穹顶上面，进入外面的露天大气？”
“没错。不过，这可不是一件好玩的事。大多数川陀本地人不会那样做，他们不喜欢到穹顶上去，想到这点会使他们产生晕眩或其他症候。参与这个气象研究计划的大都是外星人士。”
谢顿从窗口往外看．视线穿过草地与校园巾的小花同。外面一片阳光普照，没有任何阴影或丝毫闷热。然后，他语重心长地说：“我想我不能责怪川陀人贪图温室的舒适，但我认为好奇心能驱使某些人到穹顶上去，我就是其中之一。”
“你的意思是，你想看看气象学的实际工作？”
“我想就是这样，怎样才能到穹顶上去？”
“毫无困难。一部升降机就能把你带上去，门一打开，你就到了那里。我曾经去过，感觉实在……新奇。”
“这会让我暂时忘掉心理史学。”谢顿叹了口气，“我很高兴有这个机会。”
“此外，”阮达说，“我伯父常说：‘所有知识皆一体’，他说得或许没错。你也许会从气象学那里学到些什么，能对你的心理史学有所帮助。难道没有这个可能吗？”
谢顿勉强露出一丝微笑：“很多很多事情都有可能。”然后，他又在心中补充道：但实际上却不可行。
Chapter 22

Dors seemed amused. "Meteorology?"
Seldon said, "Yes. Theres work scheduled for tomorrow and Ill go up with them."
"Are you tired of history?"
Seldon nodded his head somberly. "Yes, I am. Ill welcome the change. Besides, Randy says its another problem thats too massive for mathematics to handle and it will do me good to see that my situation isnt unique."
"I hope youre not agoraphobic."
Seldon smiled. "No, Im not, but I see why you ask. Randy says that Trantorians are frequently agoraphobic and wont go Upperside. I imagine they feel uncomfortable without a protective enclosure ..."Dors nodded. "You can see where that would be natural, but there are also many Trantorians who are to be found among the planets of the Galaxy--tourists, administrators, soldiers. And agoraphobia isnt particularly rare in the Outworlds either."
"That may be, Dors, but Im not agoraphobic. I am curious and I welcome the change, so Ill be joining them tomorrow."
Dors hesitated. "I should go up with you, but I have a heavy schedule tomorrow. And, if youre not agoraphobic, youll have no trouble and youll probably enjoy yourself. Oh, and stay close to the meteorologists. Ive heard of people getting lost up there."
"Ill be careful. Its a long time since Ive gotten truly lost anywhere."
第二十二章
　　铎丝似乎觉得很有意思：“气象学？”
谢顿说：“对，他们明天排了工作，我要跟他们一起上去。”
“你对历史厌倦了？”
谢顿忧郁地点了点头：“是的，的确如此，我希望能有点变化。此外，阮达说这是另一个数学同样难以处理的复杂问题。让我看看自己的处境并不孤独，到我也会有好处的。”
“我希望你没有空旷恐惧症。”
谢顿微微一笑：“没有，我没有，但我知道你为何这样问。阮达说川陀人通常都有空旷恐惧症，全都不愿到穹顶上去。我可以想象，丧失这个保护层会使他们感到不舒服。”
铎丝点了点头：“那是显然易见的事，但在银河其他行星上，也能发现不少川陀人——观光客、行政官员、军人。反之，空旷恐惧症在外星人士间也不罕见。”
“或许是吧，铎丝，不过我并没有这个毛病。我感到好奇，我渴望一点变化，所以明天我要加人他们。”
铎丝迟疑了一下：“我应该跟你一起上去，可是明天我的时程排得很满。话说回来，假如你没有空旷恐惧症，那就应该没问题，你可能会玩得很开心。噢，记得紧跟着那些气象学家，我听说曾经有人在上面迷路。”
“我会小心的，我很久没有真正迷路了。”
Chapter 23
Jenarr Leggen had a dark look about him. It was not so much his complexion, which was fair enough. It was not even his eyebrows, which were thick and dark enough. It was, rather, that those eyebrows were hunched over deep-set eyes and a long and rather prominent nose. He had, as a result, a most unmerry look. His eyes did not smile and when he spoke, which wasnt often, he had a deep, strong voice, surprisingly resonant for his rather thin body. He said, "Youll need warmer clothing than that, Seldon."
Seldon said, "Oh?" and looked about.
There were two men and two women who were making ready to go up with Leggen and Seldon And, as in Leggens own case, their rather satiny Trantorian clothing was covered by thick sweaters that, not surprisingly, were brightly colored in bold designs. No two were even faintly alike, of course. Seldon looked down at himself and said, "Sorry, I didnt know but I dont have any suitable outer garment."
"I can give you one. I think theres a spare here somewhere.--Yes, here it is. A little threadbare, but its better than nothing."
"Wearing sweaters like these tan make you unpleasantly warm," said Seldon.
"Here they would," said Leggen. "Other conditions exist Upperside. Cold and windy. Too bad I dont have spare leggings and boots for you too. Youll want them later."
They were taking with them a cart of instruments, which they were testing one by one with what Seldon thought was unnecessary slowness. "Your home planet cold?" asked Leggen.
Seldon said, "Parts of it, of course. The part of Helicon I come from is mild and often rainy."
"Too bad. You wont like the weather Upperside."
"I think I can manage to endure it for the time well be up there."
When they were ready, the group filed into an elevator that was marked: OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
"Thats because it goes Upperside," said one of the young women, "and people arent supposed to be up there without good reason." Seldon had not met the young woman before, but he had heard her addressed as Clowzia. He didnt know if that was a first name, a last name, or a nickname. The elevator seemed no different from others that Seldon had been on, either here on Trantor or at home in Helicon (barring, of course, the gravitic lift he and Hummin had used), but there was something about knowing that it was going to take him out of the confines of the planet and into emptiness above that made it feel like a spaceship.
Seldon smiled internally. A foolish fantasy.
The elevator quivered slightly, which remind Seldon of Hummins forebodings of Galactic decay. Leggen, along with the other men and one of the women, seemed frozen and waiting, as though they had suspended thought as well as activity until they could get out, but Clowzia kept glancing at him as though she found him terribly impressive.
Seldon leaned close and whispered to her (he hesitated to disturb the others), "Are we going up very high?"
"High?" she repeated. She spoke in a normal voice, apparently not feeling that the others required silence. She seemed very young and it occurred to Seldon that she was probably an undergraduate. An apprentice, perhaps.
"Were taking a long time. Upperside must be many stories high in the air."
For a moment, she looked puzzled. Then, "Oh no. Not high at all. We started very deep. The University is at a low level. We use a great deal of energy and if were quite deep, the energy costs are lower."
Leggen said, "All right. Were here. Lets get the equipment out."
The elevator stopped with a small shudder and the wide door slid open rapidly. The temperature dropped at once and Seldon thrust his hands into his pockets and was very glad he had a sweater on. A cold wind stirred his hair and it occurred to him that he would have found a hat useful and, even as he thought that, Leggen pulled something out of a fold in his sweater, snapped it open, and put it on his head. The others did the same.
Only Clowzia hesitated. She paused just before she put hers on, then offered it to Seldon.
Seldon shook his head. "I cant take your hat, Clowzia."
"Go ahead. I have long hair and its pretty thick. Yours is short and a little ... thin."
Seldon would have liked to deny that firmly and at another time he would have. Now, however, he took the hat and mumbled, "Thank you. If your head gets cold, Ill give it back."
Maybe she wasnt so young. It was her round face, almost a baby face. And now that she had called attention to her hair, he could see that it was a charming russet shade. He had never seen hair quite like that on Helicon.
Outside it was cloudy, as it had been the time he was taken across open country to the Palace. It was considerably colder than it had been then, but he assumed that was because they were six weeks farther into winter. The clouds were thicker than they had been on the earlier occasion and the day was distinctly darker and threatening--or was it just closer to night? Surely, they wouldnt come up to do important work without leaving themselves an ample period of daylight to do it in. Or did they expect to take very little time? He would have liked to have asked, but it occurred to him that they might not like questions at this time. All of them seemed to be in states varying from excitement to anger.
Seldon inspected his surroundings.
He was standing on something that he thought might be dull metal from the sound it made when he surreptitiously thumped his foot down on it. It was not bare metal, however. When he walked, he left footprints. The surface was clearly covered by dust or fine sand or clay. Well, why not? There could scarcely be anyone coming up here to dust the place. He bent down to pinch up some of the matter out of curiosity.
Clowzia had come up to him. She noticed what he was doing and said, with the air of a housewife caught at an embarrassing negligence, "We do sweep hereabouts for the sake of the instruments. Its much worse most places Upperside, but it really doesnt matter. It makes for insulation, you know."
Seldon grunted and continued to look about. There was no chance of understanding the instruments that looked as though they were growing out of the thin soil (if one could call it that). He hadnt the faintest idea of what they were or what they measured.
Leggen was walking toward him. He was picking up his feet and putting them down gingerly and it occurred to Seldon that he was doing so to avoid jarring the instruments. He made a mental note to walk that way himself.
"You! Seldon!"
Seldon didnt quite like the tone of voice. He replied coolly, "Yes, Dr. Leggen?"
"Well, Dr. Seldon, then." He said it impatiently. "That little fellow Randa told me you are a mathematician."
"Thats right."
"A good one?"
"Id like to think so, but its a hard thing to guarantee."
"And youre interested in intractable problems?"
Seldon said feelingly, "Im stuck with one."
"Im stuck with another. Youre free to look about. If you have any questions, our intern, Clowzia, will help out. You might be able to help us."
"I would be delighted to, but I know nothing about meteorology."
"Thats all right, Seldon. I just want you to get a feel for this thing and then Id like to discuss my mathematics, such as it is."
"Im at your service."
Leggen turned away, his long scowling face looking grim. Then he turned back. "If you get cold--too cold--the elevator door is open. You just step in and touch the spot marked; UNIVERSITY BASE. It will take you down and the elevator will then return to us automatically. Clowzia will show you--if you forget."
"I wont forget."
This time he did leave and Seldon looked after him, feeling the cold wind knife through his sweater. Clowzia came back over to him, her face slightly reddened by that wind.
Seldon said, "Dr. Leggen seems annoyed. Or is that just his ordinary outlook on life?"
She giggled. "He does look annoyed most of the time, but right now he really is."
Seldon said very naturally, "Why?"
Clowzia looked over her shoulder, her long hair swirling. Then she said, "Im not supposed to know, but I do just the same. Dr. Leggen had it all figured out that today, just at this time, there was going to be a break in the clouds and hed been planning to make special measurements in sunlight. Only ... well, look at the weather."
Seldon nodded.
"We have holovision receivers up here, so he knew it was cloudy worse than usual--and I guess he was hoping there would be something wrong with the instruments so that it would be their fault and not that of his theory. So far, though, they havent found anything out of the way."
"And thats why he looks so unhappy."
"Well, he never looks happy."
Seldon looked about, squinting. Despite the clouds, the light was harsh. He became aware that the surface under his feet was not quite horizontal. He was standing on a shallow dome and as he looked outward there were other domes in all directions, with different widths and heights. "Upperside seems to be irregular," he said.
"Mostly, I think. Thats the way it worked out."
"Any reason for it?"
"Not really. The way Ive heard it explained--I looked around and asked, just as you did, you know--was that originally the people on Trantor domed in places, shopping malls, sports arenas, things like that, then whole towns, so that (here were lots of domes here and there, with different heights and different widths. When they all came together, it was all uneven, but by that time, people decided thats the way it ought to be."
"You mean that something quite accidental came to be viewed as a tradition?"
"I suppose so--if you want to put it that way."
(If something quite accidental can easily become viewed as a tradition and be made unbreakable or nearly so, thought Seldon, would that be a law of psychohistory? It sounded trivial, but how many other laws, equally trivial, might there be? A million? A billion? Were there a relatively few general laws from which these trivial ones could be derived as corollaries? How could he say? For a while, lost in thought, he almost forgot the biting wind.)
Clowzia was aware of that wind, however, for she shuddered and said, "Its very nasty. Its much better under the dome."
"Are you a Trantorian?" asked Seldon.
"Thats right."
Seldon remembered Ranchs dismissal of Trantorians as agoraphobic and said, "Do you mind being up here?"
"I hate it," said Clowzia, "but I want my degree and my specialty and status and Dr. Leggen says I cant get it without some field work. So here I am, hating it, especially when its so cold. When its this cold, by the way, you wouldnt dream that vegetation actually grows on these domes, would you?"
"It does?" He looked at Clowzia sharply, suspecting some sort of practical joke designed to make him look foolish. She looked totally innocent, but how much of that was real and how much was just her baby face?
"Oh sure. Even here, when its warmer. You notice the soil here? We keep it swept away because of our work, as I said, but in other places it accumulates here and there and is especially deep in the low places where the domes meet. Plants grow in it."
"But where does the soil come from?"
"When the dome covered just part of the planet, the wind deposited soil on them, little by little. Then, when Trantor was all covered and the living levels were dug deeper and deeper, some of the material dug up, if suitable, would be spread over the top."
"Surely, it would break down the domes."
"Oh no. The domes are very strong and theyre supported almost everywhere. The idea was, according to a book-film I viewed, that they were going to grow crops Upperside, but it turned out to be much more practical to do it inside the dome. Yeast and algae could be cultivated within the domes too, taking the pressure off the usual crops, so it was decided to let Upperside go wild. There are animals on Upperside too--butterflies, bees, mice, rabbits. Lots of them."
"Wont the plant roots damage the domes?"
"In thousands of years they havent. The domes are treated so that they repel the roots. Most of the growth is grass, but there are trees too. Youd be able to see for yourself if this were the warm season or if we were farther south or if you were up in a spaceship." She looked at him with a sidewise flick of her eyes, "Did you see Trantor when you were coming down from space?"
"No, Clowzia, I must confess I didnt. The hypership was never well placed for viewing. Have you ever seen Trantor from space?"
She smiled weakly. "Ive never been in spare."
Seldon looked about. Gray everywhere.
"I cant make myself believe it," he said. "About vegetation Upperside, I mean."
"Its true, though. Ive heard people say--Otherworlders, like yourself, who did see Trantor from space--that the planet looks green, like a lawn, because its mostly grass and underbrush. There are trees too, actually. Theres a copse not very far from here. Ive seen it. Theyre evergreens and theyre up to six meters high."
"Where?"
"You cant see it from here. Its on the other side of a dome. Its--"
The call came out thinly. (Seldon realized they had been walking while they had been talking and had moved away from the immediate vicinity of the others.)
"Clowzia. Get back here. We need you."
Clowzia said, "Uh-oh. Coming.--Sorry, Dr. Seldon, I have to go."
She ran off, managing to step lightly despite her lined boots. Had she been playing with him? Had she been filling the gullible foreigner with a mess of lies for amusements sake? Such things had been known to happen on every world and in every time. An air of transparent honesty was no guide either; in fact, successful taletellers would deliberately cultivate just such an air.
So could there really be six-meter trees Upperside? Without thinking much about it, he moved in the direction of the highest dome on the horizon. He swung his arms in an attempt to warm himself. And his feet were getting cold. Clowzia hadnt pointed. She might have, to give him a hint of the direction of the trees, but she didnt. Why didnt she? To be sure, she had been called away.
The domes were broad rather than high, which was a good thing, since otherwise the going would have been considerably more difficult. On the other hand, the gentle grade meant trudging a distance before he could top a dome and look down the other side.
Eventually, he could see the other side of the dome he had climbed. He looked back to make sure he could still see the meteorologists and their instruments. They were a good way off, in a distant valley, but he could see them clearly enough. Good.
He saw no copse, no trees, but there was a depression that snaked about between two domes. Along each side of that crease, the soil was thicker and there were occasional green smears of what might be moss. If he followed the crease and if it got low enough and the soil was thick enough, there might be trees. He looked back, trying to fix landmarks in his mind, but there were just the rise and fall of domes. It made him hesitate and Dorss warning against his being lost, which had seemed a rather unnecessary piece of advice then, made more sense now. Still, it seemed clear to him that the crease was a kind of road. If he followed it for some distance, he only had to turn about and follow it back to return to this spot.
He strode off purposefully, following the rounded crease downward. There was a soft rumbling noise above, but he didnt give it any thought. He had made up his mind that he wanted to see trees and that was all that occupied him at the moment.
The moss grew thicker and spread out like a carpet and here and there grassy tufts had sprung up. Despite the desolation Upperside, the moss was bright green and it occurred to Seldon that on a cloudy, overcast planet there was likely to be considerable rain.
The crease continued to curve and there, just above another dome, was a dark smudge against the gray sky and he knew he had found the trees. Then, as though his mind, having been liberated by the sight of those trees, could turn to other things, Seldon took note of the rumble he had heard before and had, without thinking, dismissed as the sound of machinery. Now he considered that possibility: Was it, indeed, the sound of machinery? Why not? He was standing on one of the myriad domes that covered hundreds of millions of square kilometers of the world-city. There must be machinery of all kinds hidden under those domes--ventilation motors, for one thing. Maybe it could be heard, where and when all the other sounds of the world-city were absent. Except that it did not seem to come from the ground. He looked up at the dreary featureless sky. Nothing.
He continued to scan the sky, vertical creases appearing between his eyes and then, far off It was a small dark spot, showing up against the gray. And whatever it was it seemed to be moving about as though getting its bearings before it was obscured by the clouds again.
Then, without knowing why, he thought, Theyre after me. And almost before he could work out a line of action, he had taken one. He ran desperately along the crease toward the trees and then, to reach them more quickly, he turned left and hurtled up and over a low dome, treading through brown and dying fernlike overgrowth, including thorny sprigs with bright red berries.
第二十三章
　　杰纳尔•里根给人一种阴郁的感觉。这并非由于他的肤色（其实他的肤色相当白净），甚至不是由于他的眉毛又浓又深。给人如此印象的真正原因，应该是那两道眉毛突出于深陷的眼窝，再加上他的鼻子又高又凸。因此，他看起来总是带着一种极不快乐的表情。他的眼睛一向没有笑意，也很少开口说话，而在他说话时，会有一种深沉、雄浑的声音，从相当瘦小的体内发出惊人的共鸣。
他说：“你需要暖和一点的衣服，谢顿。”
“哦？”谢顿四下望了望。
另有两男两女准备随里根与谢顿一同上去，他们都跟里根一样，在光滑如缎的川陀服装外罩了一件厚毛衣。每件毛衣都是色彩鲜艳、设计大胆，谢顿已经见怪不怪。当然，任何两件都没有丝毫雷同之处。
谢顿低头看了看自己：“对不起，我不知道。可是我没有合适的外套。”
“我可以给你一件，我想这里应该还有件多出来的——好。就是这一件。有点破旧，不过总比没有好。”
“穿这样的毛衣会让人热得很不舒服。”谢顿说。
“在这里的确会，”里根说，“穹顶上的情形却不一样，那里又冷风又大。可惜我没有多余的绑腿和靴子能借你，等会儿你就会想要了。”
他们带着一整辆推车的仪器，正在一个一个测试，谢顿觉得他们的动作慢得没有必要。
“你的母星冷吗？”里根问道。
谢顿说：“某些地区相当冷，但我住的地方气候温和，而且经常下雨。”
“太糟了，你不会喜欢穹顶上的天气。”
“我想我们在上面这段时间，我总有办法挺得住。”
准备就绪之后，一行人便鱼贯进入升降机，升降机上标示着几个宁：“公务专用”。
“那是因为它直接通往穹顶上，”其中一位年轻女子说，“要是没有正当理由，一般人不该到那里去。”
谢顿以前未曾见过这名年轻女子，但刚才听别人叫她克劳吉雅。他不知道那究竟是名、是姓，或者只是一个昵称。
与谢顿在川陀或赫利肯搭过的升降机比较，这部升降机似乎没什么不同（当然，他与夫铭一起使用的重力升降机例外）。但由于知道它将带着自己脱离这颗行星的范围，抵达空无一物的穹顶上，因而使人有置身宇宙飞船的感觉。
谢顿在心中暗笑，这实在是愚蠢的幻想。
升降机正在微微颤动，使谢顿想起夫铭有关银河帝国衰败的预言。里根与另外两男一女似乎全都静止不动地等在那里，仿佛在踏出升降机前，他们暂停了一切思想与行动。不过克劳古雅却频频瞥眼看他，好像他特别引人注目。
谢顿凑近她，耳语道（他唯恐打扰到其他人）：“我们要到很高的地方吗？”
“高？”她重复了一遍。她以正常的音量说话，显然并未感到其他人需要安静。她似乎非常年轻，谢顿想到她可能是大学部的学生，或许只是来见习的。
“我们上升已有好一阵子，穹顶上一定在很多层楼高的空中。”
一时之间，她露出疑惑的表情。然后说：“哦。不对，一点也不高。我们从很深的地方出发，大学所在的楼层很低。我们使用大量的能源，住得够低的话，可以使能量的成本相对降低。”
里根说：“好，我们到了，把设备推出去吧。”
升降机在微微震颤中停下来，宽大的机门迅速滑开。此时气温立刻下降，谢顿赶紧将双手插进口袋，很高兴自己身上套了一件毛衣。一阵冷风吹乱他的头发，他才想到最好还能有顶帽子。就在这样想的时候，里根已从毛衣折袋中掏出一样东西，一把扯开，再戴到自己头上，其他人也纷纷照做。
只有克劳吉雅犹豫不决。在她正想戴上帽子之际，她停了下来，将帽子递给谢顿。
谢顿摇了摇头：“我不能拿你的帽子，克劳吉雅。”
“拿去吧。我有长头发，而且相当浓密。你的头发短，而且有点……薄。”
谢顿很想极力否认这一点，如果在其他情况下，他一定会这么做。然而此时他只是接过帽子，喃喃说道：“谢谢，如果你觉得冷，我马上还你。”
也许她并非那么年轻，也许只是因为她有一张娃娃脸。由于她提到自己的头发，谢顿才注意到它是迷人的红褐色。在赫利肯，他从未见过这种颜色的头发。
外面是沉沉的阴天，正如他经过露天的乡间，前往皇宫途中所遇到的天气。不过今天显然较冷，他猜想这是因为前后相隔六周，现在已是深冬的缘故。此外云层也比那天还厚，而且天色更加阴暗、恶劣——或者只是因为天快黑了。当然，他们既然到上面从事重要工作，不会不为自己预留充分的白昼时间。或者说，他们算准了能很快完成工作。
他原本想开口发问，又想到此刻他们或许不喜欢有人问东问西。这些人似乎都进入一种特殊心理态，从兴奋到愤怒都有可能。
谢顿检视了一下周围的环境。
他站在某种东西上面，猜想可能是暗淡的金属。这是他暗中用力踩了一脚之后，根据声音所判断的。然而那并非裸露在外的金属，他行走时会在上面留下脚印。这个表面显然覆盖着一层灰尘，或是细沙或黏土。
嗯．为何不会呢？几乎不可能有人上来打扫这个地方。出于好奇心，他弯下腰掐了一点尘土。
克劳吉雅已走到他身边，她注意到他的动作。就像家庭主妇被人逮到把柄一样，她以尴尬的口吻说：“为了这些仪器，我们已经经常清扫附近的区域。穹顶上大多数地方比这里糟得多，不过这其实也没什么关系，它可以用来隔热。”
谢顿含糊应了一声，又继续四下张望。那些看来像是从薄土壤（如果能这样称呼的话）长出来的各种仪器，他根本没机会去了解它们的功能。对于它们究竟是些什么，或者测量的是什么，他连最模糊的概念都没有。
这时里根走过来，双脚小心翼翼地轮流举起、放下。谢顿想到，他这样做是为了避免仪器受到震动。于是他提醒自己，从现在起也要这样走路。
“你！谢顿！”
谢顿不太喜欢这种语调，他冷冷地答道：“什么事，里根博士？”
“好吧，既然这样，谢顿博士。”他以不耐烦的口吻说，“阮达那小个子告诉我，说你是个数学家。”
“是的。”
“优秀的数学家？”
“我希望如此，但这是难以保证的事。”
“你对棘手的问题特别有兴趣？”
谢顿若有所思地说：“如今我就陷在一个问题里面。”
“而我陷在另一个里面。你可以随便看看，如果有什么问题，我们的见习生克劳吉雅会帮你解答。你也许有办法助我们一臂之力。”
“我乐意效劳，可是我对气象学一窍不通。”
“没有关系。谢顿。我只希望让你对这件事有点感觉，然后我再跟你讨论我的数学问题，如果它也能称为数学。”
“我随时候教。”
里根转身离去，又长又苦的脸看来绷得很紧。他随即又转回来对谢顿说：“如果你觉得冷得受不了，升降机的门开着，你只要走进去，在标着‘大学底层’的地方按一下，它就会带你下去，然后它会自动回到这里。克劳吉雅会教你——万一你忘记的话。”
“我不会忘记的。”
这次他真要的走了开。谢顿目送他的背影，感到冷风像利刃般切割着身上的毛衣。此时克劳吉雅走回来，她的脸被风吹得有些发红。
谢顿说：“里根博士似乎有烦恼——或者他一向就是如此？”
她格格笑了起来：“大多数的时候，他只是显得心烦气躁，不过现在他真要是如此。”
谢顿很自然地问道：“为什么？”
克劳吉雅转头看了看，长发随之扬起。“这事他们没告诉我，不过我还是知道了。里根博士本来全都计算好，在今天这个时候，云层会裂开一道缝隙，他原本打算在阳光下做些特殊的测量。可是……呃，你看这个天气。”
谢顿点了点头。
“我们在这上面装有全息接收机，所以他早就知道乌云密布——天气比平常还糟。我猜，他希望是那些仪器出了毛病，这样问题就在于仪器，而不在他的理论。不过直到目前为止，他们还没发现任何故障。”
“所以他才显得这么闷闷不乐。”
“他从来也没显得快乐过。”
谢顿眯着眼睛四下眺望，虽然乌云遮日，光线仍旧刺眼。他察觉到脚下的表面并非完全水平；他站在一个浅坡穹顶上，当他极目望去，四面八方都能见到许多穹顶，各个穹顶的宽度与高度都不相同。
“这上面似乎崎岖不平。”他说。
“我想大部分都是如此，当初盖的时候就是这样。”
“有没有什么理由？”
“其实也没什么理由。我刚来的时候跟你一样，也是到处张望，逢人就问。我听到的解释是这样的，川陀居民原本只在特定场所，例如室内购物中心、体育馆这种地方建有穹顶，后来才扩及整个城镇，那时全球各处有许多穹顶，高度与宽度都不样。等到它们全部相连起来，各处自然显得凹凸不平。不过那时，人们反倒认为它本来就应该是这个样子。”
“你的意思是，原本相当偶然的一件事，后来却被视为传统？”
“我想是吧，如果你要这么说。”
（假如某些相当偶然的事件，会很容易就被视为传统，因而再也无法打破——或者几乎牢不可破，谢顿想道，这算不算心理史学的一条定律呢？它听来相当显而易见，可是，其他同样显而易见的定律还有多少？一百万条？十亿条？究竟有没有少数几条一般性定律，可将这些显而易见的定律逐一导出？他要怎样才能弄得清楚？一时之间他陷入沉思，几乎忘了刺骨的寒风。）
然而，克劳吉雅依旧察觉强风的存在，她一面发抖一面说：“天气真恶劣，躲在穹顶底下好多了。”
“你是川陀人吗？”谢顿问道。
“是的。”
谢顿想起阮达曾经讥笑川陀人都有空旷恐惧症，于是说：“你不介意待在上面吗？”
“我恨透了，”克劳吉雅说，“但是我想求得学位、专长与地位，而里根博士说除非我做些田野工作，否则无法毕业。所以我只好来啦，虽然我恨透了，尤其是这么冷的时候。对了，像这么冷的天气，你做梦也想不到真会有植物生长在穹顶上吧？”
“有吗？”他以锐利的目光望着克劳吉雅，怀疑这是专门设计来愚弄他的一种恶作剧。她看来全然天真无邪，不过这有多少是真的，又有多少只是由于她的娃娃脸？
“喔，当然。即使在这里，天气暖和一点时也有。你注意到此地的土壤吗？我说过，为了我们的工作，我们总是将泥土扫走。可是在其他地方，到处都累积着泥上，穹顶交接的低洼处积得尤其深，植物就在那里生长。”
“可是，那些泥土是从哪里来的？”
“当穹顶尚未将这颗行星全部覆盖起来时，风把泥土吹到上面，一点一点累积起来。后来，当川陀整个被穹顶笼罩，活动层级越挖越深时，总会有些土壤被掘出来，合适的，就会被洒到穹顶上。”
“不用说，这样会把穹顶压坏的。”
“噢，不会。这些穹顶非常坚固，而且几乎到处都有支撑。根据我从一本胶卷书所读到的，当初人们是准备在穹顶上种植农作物，结果发现在穹顶里面发展农业更加实际。酵母和藻类也可在穹顶内培养，减轻了普通农作物的需求压力，所以最后决定任由穹顶上荒芜。穹顶上也有一些动物，蝴蝶、蜜蜂、老鼠、兔子……数量还真不少呢。”
“植物根部不会对穹顶造成损害吗？”
“好几千年过去了，这种情形一直未曾发生。穹顶都经过特殊处理，能阻绝根部渗透。大多数植物是草，不过也有树木。如果现在是暖和的季节，或者我们位于更南的地方，或者你在一艘宇宙飞船上，那么你自己就能看出来；”她很快瞟了他一眼，“当你从太空降落时，有没有看一看川陀？”
“没有，克劳吉雅，我必须承认并未看过，超空间飞船一直没转到适宜观景的角度。你从太空中眺望过川陀吗？’’她露出淡淡的笑容：“我从没上过太空。”
谢顿往四处望去，只见一片灰暗。
“我实在无法相信。”他说，“我是指穹顶上有植物这件事。”
“不过这是千真万确的。我听人家说过——其他世界人士，就像你一样，他们真的从太空看过川陀——他们说这颗行星看来绿油油一片，就好像一块草地，因为表面大多是草丛和矮树丛。事实上，还有树木呢，离这里不远就有一片树林，我曾经见过。它们都是常绿树，最高的有六米。”
“在哪里？”
“你在这里看不见，它在一个穹顶的另一侧：是……”
这时传来一阵微弱的呼唤：“克劳吉雅，回来，这里需要你。”（谢顿发觉他们边聊边走，已经与其他人拉开一段距离。）
克劳吉雅应道：“哟嗬！来啦——抱歉，谢顿博士，我得走了。”她马上转身离开，虽然穿着厚实的靴子，她仍设法将脚步放得很轻。
她是不是在跟他闹着玩？会不会是为了找乐子，才对一个容易上当的外人灌输那么多谎言？这种事在任何时间、任何世界上都时有所闻，透明般诚实的态度也当不得真；事实上。一个成功的说谎家总会刻意制造这种态度。
所以说，穹顶上真有六米高的树木吗？他并未多加思索，便朝地平线最高的一个穹顶走去。他不停摆动双手，试图使自己暖和一点，双脚却觉得越来越冷。
克劳吉雅并未指点方向。她应该给一点提示，告诉他那些树木位在何方，可是她没有。为什么没有呢？对了，她刚好被人叫走了。
穹顶十分宽阔，可是不太高。这是个好现象，否则这趟路会比现在困难许多。另一方面，缓坡代表他必须蹒跚地走上一大段，才能登上一座穹顶的顶峰，俯视另一侧的景象。
最后，他终于看到那个穹顶的另一侧。他回头望去，想确定自己仍看得见那些气象学家以及他们的仪器。他们在一个遥远的谷地中，与他已有好长一段距离，不过他还是看得足够清楚，很好。
他没有见到任何树林或树木，不过两个穹顶间有一道蜿蜒曲折的凹洼。这条干沟两侧的土壤较厚，偶尔可见一些绿色斑点，看来或许是苔藓。假如他沿着这条干沟前进，假如前面的凹洼够低、土壤够厚，那就有可能发现树木。
他向后眺望，试图将一些路标牢记心中，但目力所及尽是起伏的穹顶，这使他踌躇不前。铎丝曾警告他有迷路的可能，当时那似乎是个毫无必要的忠告，如今看来还颇有道理。然而他几乎能确定这条干沟是一条小路，如果沿着它走一段，他只需要向后转，就能循原路走回这个出发点。
他故意迈开大步，沿着曲折的干沟往下走。头顶上传来一阵轻微的隆隆噪音，不过他并未留意。他下定决心要看看那些树木，此时此刻，他的心思已完全被这个念头占据。
苔藓越来越厚，像地毯一样四处蔓延，而且不时可见一簇簇草丛。穹顶上虽然一片荒芜，这些苔藓却生得鲜嫩青翠，谢顿因而想到，在一个多云、阴暗的行星上，很可能有大量的雨水。
这条干沟继续弯曲延伸，不久，在另一个穹顶的正中，有个黑点出现在灰暗的天空背景前，他知道终于发现树木了。
看到这些树木之后，他的心灵好像得到解放，总算能想到其他事情。这时，谢顿才注意到曾听见的那阵隆隆声，刚才他不假思索，就把它当做机器运转的声音，因此根本未曾理会。现在，他开始考虑这个可能性：它真是机器发出的噪音吗？
为何不是呢？他如今站在一座穹顶上，而这个全球性都会的二亿平方公里面积，全部植盖着无数类似的穹顶。在这些穹顶下，一定隐藏着各式各样的机械，例如通风系统的发动机。或许，在这个大都会的其他声音尽皆消逝的时间与空间，它的声音仍然清晰可闻。
只不过，它似乎并非是从底下传来的。他抬头看了看阴沉单调的天空——什么也没有。
他继续搜索天空，两眼之间挤出笔直的皱纹。然后，在远方……
那是个小黑点，出现在灰暗的背景中。不论它是什么，它似乎正在四下移动，仿佛想在它再度被云层遮掩之前，赶紧定好方位。
然后，他突然有一种毫无来由的想法：他们是在找我。
几乎在他能想出该如何反应之前，他已经采取行动。他沿着那条干沟，拼命朝向那些树木奔去。为了更快抵达，他在半途左转，飞也似地越过一个低矮的穹顶，踏过遍地垂死的棕色羊齿类植物，和长着鲜红莓果的多刺嫩枝。

Chapter 24

Seldon panted, facing a tree, holding it closely, embracing it. He watched for the flying object to make its appearance again so that he could back about the tree and hide on the far side, like a squirrel. The tree was cold, its bark was rough, it gave no comfort--but it offered cover. Of course, that might be insufficient, if he was being searched for with a heat-seeker, but, on the other hand, the cold trunk of a tree might blur even that.
Below him was hard-packed soil. Even in this moment of hiding, of attempting to see his pursuer while remaining unseen, he could not help wondering how thick the soil might be, how long it had taken to accumulate, many domes in the warmer areas of Trantor carried forests on their back, and whether the trees were always confined to the creases between domes, leaving the higher regions to moss, grass, and underbrush.
He saw it again. It was not a hypership, nor even an ordinary air-jet. It was a jet-down. He could see the faint glow of the ion trails corning out at the vertices of a hexagon, neutralizing the gravitational pull and allowing the wings to keep it aloft like a large soaring bird. It was a vehicle that could hover and explore a planetary terrain.
It was only the clouds than had saved him. Even if they were using heat-seekers, that would only indicate there were people below. The jet-down would have to make a tentative dive below the banked ceiling before it could hope to know how many human beings there were and whether any of them might be the particular person the patties aboard were seeking.
The jet-down was closer now, but it couldnt hide from him either. The rumble of the engine gave it away and they couldnt rum that off, not as long as they wished to continue their search. Seldon knew the jet-downs, for on Helicon or on any undomed world with skies that cleared now and then, they were common, with many in private hands.
Of what possible use would jet-downs be on Trantor, with all the human life of the world under domes, with low cloud ceilings all but perpetual--except for a few government vehicles designed for just this purpose, that of picking up a wanted person who had been lured above the domes? Why not? Government forces could nor enter the grounds of the University, but perhaps Seldon was no longer on the grounds. He was on top of the domes which might be outside the jurisdiction of any local government. An Imperial vehicle might have every right to land on any part of the dome and question or remove any person found upon it. Hummin had not warned him of this, but perhaps he had merely not thought of doing so.
The jet-down was even closer now, nosing about like a blind beast sniffing out its prey. Would it occur to them to search this group of trees? Would they land and send out an armed soldier or two to beat through the copse? And if so, what could he do? He was unarmed and all his quicktwist agility would be useless against the agonizing pain of a neuronic whip. It was not attempting to land. Either they missed the significance of the trees Or--
A new thought suddenly hit him. What if this wasnt a pursuit vessel at all? What if it was part of the meteorological testing? Surely, meteorologists would want to test the upper reaches of the atmosphere. Was he a fool to hide from it?
The sky was getting darker. The clouds were getting thicker or, much more likely, night was falling.
And it was getting colder and would get colder still. Was he going to stay out here freezing because a perfectly harmless jet-down had made an appearance and had activated a sense of paranoia that he had never felt before? He had a strong impulse to leave the copse and get back to the meteorological station. After all, how would the man Hummin feared so much--Demerzel--know that Seldon would, at this particular time, be Upperside and ready to be taken? For a moment, that seemed conclusive and, shivering with the cold, he moved out from behind the tree.
And then he scurried back as the vessel reappeared even closer than before. He hadnt seen it do anything that would seem to be meteorological. It did nothing that might be considered sampling, measuring, or testing. Would he see such things if they took place? He did not know the precise sort of instruments the jet-down carried or how they worked. If they were doing meteorological work, he might not be able to tell.--Still, could he take the chance of coming into the open?
After all, what if Demerzel did know of his presence Upperside, simply because an agent of his, working in the University, knew about it and had reported the matter. Lisung Randa, that cheerful, smiling little Easterner, had suggested he go Upperside. He had suggested it quite forcefully and the subject had not arisen naturally out of the conversation; at least, not naturally enough. Was it possible that he was a government agent and had alerted Demerzel somehow? Then there was Leggen, who had given him the sweater. The sweater was useful, but why hadnt Leggen told him he would need one earlier so he could get his own? Was there something special about the one he was wearing? It was uniformly purple, while all the others indulged in the Trantorian fashion of bright patterns. Anyone looking down from a height would see a moving dull blotch in among others that were bright and know immediately whom they wanted. And Clowzia? She was supposedly Upperside to learn meteorology and help the meteorologists. How was it possible that she could come to him, talk to him at ease, and quietly walk him away from the others and isolate him so that he could easily be picked up?
For that matter, what about Dors Venabili? She knew he was going Upperside. She did not stop it. She might have gone with him, but she was conveniently busy. It was a conspiracy. Surely, it was a conspiracy. He had convinced himself now and there was no further thought of getting out from the shelter of the trees. (His feet felt like lumps of ice and stamping them against the ground seemed to do no good.) Would the jet-down never leave? And even as he thought that, the pitch of the engines rumble heightened and the jet-down rose into the clouds and faded away.
Seldon listened eagerly, alert to the smallest sound, making sure it was finally gone. And then, even after he was sure it was gone, he wondered if that was just a device to flush him out of hiding. He remained where he was while the minutes slowly crawled on and night continued to fall. And finally, when he felt that the true alternative to taking the chance of coming out in the open was that of freezing into insensibility, he stepped out and moved cautiously beyond the shelter of the trees. It was dusky twilight, after all. They couldnt detect him except by a heat-seeker, but, if so, he would hear the jet-down return. He waited just beyond the trees, counting to himself, ready to hide in the copse again at the smallest sound--though what good that would do him once he was spotted, he couldnt imagine.
Seldon looked about. If he could find the meteorologists, they would surely have artificial light, but except for that, there would be nothing. He could still just make out his surroundings, but in a matter of a quarter of an hour, half an hour at the outside, he would not. With no lights and a cloudy sky above, it would be dark--completely dark.
Desperate at the prospect of being enveloped in total darkness, Seldon realized that he would have to find his way back to the crease that had brought him there as quickly as possible and retrace his steps. Folding his arms tightly around himself for warmth, he set off in what he thought was the direction of the crease between the domes.
There might, of course, be more than one crease leading away from the copse, but he dimly made out some of the sprigs of berries he had seen coming in, which now looked almost black rather than bright red. He could not delay. He had to assume he was right. He moved up the crease as fast as he might, guided by failing sight and by the vegetation underfoot.
But he couldnt stay in the crease forever. He had come over what had seemed to him to be the tallest dome in sight and had found a crease that cut at right angles across his line of approach. By his reckoning, he should now turn right, then sharp left, and that would put him on the path toward the meteorologists dome.
Seldon made the left turn and, lifting his head, he could just make out the curve of a dome against the fractionally lighter sky. That had to be it! Or was that only wishful thinking?
He had no choice but to assume it wasnt. Keeping his eye on the peak so that he could move in a reasonably straight line, he headed for it as quickly as he could. As he got closer, he could make out the line of dome against sky with less and less certainty as it loomed larger and larger. Soon, if he was correct, he would be going up a gentle slope and when that slope became level he would be able to look down the other side and see the lights of the meteorologists. In the inky dark, he could not tell what lay in his path. Wishing there were at least a few sorts to shed some light, he wondered if this was how it felt to be blind. He waved his arms before him as if they were antennae. It was growing colder by the minute and he paused occasionally to blow on his hands and hold them under his armpits. He wished earnestly he could do the same for his feet. By now, he thought, if it started to precipitate, it would be snow--or, worse yet, sleet.
On ... on. There was nothing else to do.
Eventually, it seemed to him that he was moving downward. That was either wishful thinking or he had topped the dome.
He stopped. If he had topped the dome, he should be able to see the artificial light of the meteorological station. He would see the lights carried by the meteorologists themselves, sparkling or dancing like fireflies. Seldon closed his eyes as though to accustom them to dark and then try again, but that was a foolish effort. It was no darker with his eyes closed than with them open and when he opened them it was no lighter than when he had had them closed.
Possibly Leggen and the others were gone, had taken their lights with them and had turned off any lights on the instruments. Or possibly Seldon had climbed the wrong dome. Or he had followed a curved path along the dome so that he was now facing in the wrong direction. Or he had followed the wrong crease and had moved away from the copse in the wrong direction altogether. What should he do?
If he was facing the wrong direction, there was a chance that light would be visible right or left--and it wasnt. If he had followed the wrong crease, there was no possible way he could return to the copse and locate a different crease. His only chance lay in the assumption that he was facing the right direction and that the meteorological station was more or less directly ahead of him, but that the meteorologists had gone and had left it in darkness. Move forward, then. The chances of success might be small, but it was the only chance he had.
He estimated that it had taken him half an hour to move from the meteorological station to the top of the dome, having gone partway with Clowzia and sauntering with her rather than striding. He was moving at little better than a saunter now in the daunting darkness.
Seldon continued to slog forward. It would have been nice to know the time and he had a timeband, of course, but in the dark. He stopped. He wore a Trantorian timeband, which gave Galactic Standard time (as all timebands did) and which also gave Trantorian local time. Timebands were usually visible in the dark, phosphorescing so that one could tell time in the quiet dark of a bedchamber. A Heliconian timeband certainly would; why not a Trantorian one?
He looked at his timeband with reluctant apprehension and touched the contact that would draw upon the power source for light. The timeband gleamed feebly and told him the time was 1847. For it to be nighttime already, Seldon knew that it must be the winter season.--How far past the solstice was it? What was the degree of axial tipping? How long was the year? How far from the equator was he at this moment? There was no hint of an answer to any of these things, but what counted was that the spark of light was visible. He was not blind! Somehow the feeble glow of his timeband gave him renewed hope.
His spirits rose. He would move on in the direction he was going. He would move for half an hour. If he encountered nothing, he would move on five minutes more--no further--just five minutes. If he still encountered nothing, he would stop and think. That, however, would be thirty-five minutes from now. Till then, he would concentrate only on walking and on willing himself to feel warmer (He wiggled his toes, vigorously. He could still feel them.) Seldon trudged onward and the half hour passed. He paused, then hesitantly, he moved on for five more minutes.
Now he had to decide. There was nothing. He might be nowhere, far removed from any opening into the dome. He might, on the other hand, be standing three meters to the left--or right--or short--of the meteorological station. He might be two arms lengths from the opening into the dome, which would not, however, be open.
Now what?
Was there any point in shouting? He was enveloped by utter silence but for the whistling of the wind. If there were birds, beasts, or insects in among the vegetation on the domes, they were not here during this season or at this time of night or at this particular place. The wind continued to chill him. Perhaps he should have been shouting all due way. The sound might have carried a good distance in the cold air. But would there have been anyone to hear him? Would they hear him inside the dome? Were there instruments to detect sound or movement from above? Might there not be sentinels just inside? That seemed ridiculous. They would have heard his footsteps, wouldnt they?
Still--
He called out. "Help! Help! Can someone hear me?" His cry was strangled, half-embarrassed. It seemed silly shouting into vast black nothingness.
But then, he felt it was even sillier to hesitate in such a situation as this. Panic was welling up in him. He took in a deep, cold breath and screamed for as long as he could. Another breath and another scream, changing pitch. And another.
Seldon paused, breathless, turning his head every which way, even though there was nothing to see. He could not even detect an echo. There was nothing left to do but wait for the dawn. But how long was the night at this season of the year? And how cold would it get?
He felt a tiny cold touch sting his face. After a while, another. It was sleeting invisibly in the pitch blackness. And there was no way to find shelter.
He thought: It would have been better if that jet-down had seen me and picked me up. I would be a prisoner at this moment, perhaps, but Id be warm and comfortable, at least.
Or, if Hummin had never interfered, I might have been back in Helicon long ago. Under surveillance, but warm and comfortable. Right now that was all he wanted--to be warm and comfortable.
But at the moment he could only wait. He huddled down, knowing that however long the night, he dared not sleep. He slipped off his shoes and rubbed his icy feet. Quickly, he put his shoes back on.
He knew he would have to repeat this, as well as rubbing his hands and ears all night long to keep his circulation flowing. But most important to remember was that he must not let himself fall asleep. That would mean certain death. And, having carefully thought all this out, his eyes closed and he nodded off to sleep with the sleet coming down.
Rescue
LEGGEN, JENARR-- ... His contributions to meteorology, however, although considerable, pale before what has ever since been known as the Leggen Controversy. That his actions helped to place Hari Seldon in jeopardy is undisputable, but argument rages--and has always raged--as to whether those actions were the result of unintentional circumstance or part of a deliberate conspiracy. Passions have been raised on both sides and even the most elaborate studies have come to no definite conclusions. Nevertheless, the suspicions that were raised helped poison Leggens career and private life in the years that followed ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第二十四章
　　谢顿气喘吁吁，面对着一棵树，双手紧紧环抱着它。他凝望天空，等待那个飞行物再度出现，以便能像一只松鼠那样，及时躲到树木的另一侧。
这株树木触手冰凉，树皮粗糙，抱起来一点也不舒服，但是它提供了掩护。当然，如果对方用热源追踪仪搜寻他的下落，这个掩护或许不够。不过，冰冷的树干也许能将热量也一并掩去。
他的脚下是硬邦邦的密实土壤。即使在这个躲躲藏藏的时刻；即使他一方面想要看清追捕他的人，一方面又要保持自己的隐匿，他仍忍不住感到纳闷：这层土壤会有多厚？花了多久时间累积而成？在川陀较温暖的地区，有多少穹顶的背上长了森林？树木是否一律局限于穹顶间的干沟中，而将较高的区域留给苔藓、草丛与矮树丛？
他又看到那个飞行物了。它并非一艘超空间飞船，甚至不是普通的喷射机，而只是一架喷射直升机。他能看见离子尾的暗淡光辉，从一个五角形的各个顶点喷射出来。离子中和了重力的吸引，让机翼托着它像大鸟般在高空翱翔。这是一种可以在空中盘旋，用来探勘行星地表的飞行器。
幸好有云层救了他。即使他们使用热源追踪仪，它也只能指出有些人在下面而已。喷射直升机必须做一次短暂的俯冲，来到连绵不断的云幕之下，才能知道这里究竟有多少人类，以及是否可能包括机员正在寻找的特定对象。
现在，那架喷射直升机飞得更近，因此更是无法躲过谢顿的观察。引擎发出的隆隆声泄露了行踪，只要他们希望继续进行搜索，他们就不能将它关掉。谢顿熟悉这种喷射直升机，因为不论是在赫利肯，或在任何没有穹顶、天空时阴时晴的世界，它们都是很普遍的交通工具，有很多还是私人所有的。
喷射直升机在川陀可能有什么用呢？这个世界的人全部生活在穹顶下，天上几乎永远飘着低空云幕——唯有政府才会拥有少数这种飞行器，目的正是为了追捕被引诱到穹顶上的通缉犯。
有何不可？政府军警人员无法进入大学校园，但谢顿现在可能已不在校园之内。他正在穹顶上，它或许不属于任何地方政府的管辖范围。帝国飞行器也许绝对有权降落在任何穹顶上，盘问或带走在那里遇到的任何人。这一点夫铭未曾警告他，但也可能是他刚好没有想到。
此时那架喷射直升机更接近了，它正在明处侦察，像一只瞎眼野兽想用鼻子嗅出猎物的位置。他们会不会想到搜查这群树木？他们会不会降落，派出一两名武装士兵，把这片树林整个翻一遍？
若是这样，他该怎么办？他手无寸铁，面对神经鞭带来的剧痛，他矫捷的身手毫无用武之地。
但它并术试图降落。要不是他们并未发现这些树木有可疑之处……
就是……
他突然冒出一个新念头：如果它根本不是一艘缉凶飞行器呢？如果它只是气象试验的一环呢？气象学家当然也想对高层大气进行测试。
跟它躲躲藏藏，难道自己是傻子吗？
天空越来越阴暗，云层越来越厚。或者，更可能的情况是，夜晚即将降临。
气温越来越低，而且还会继续下降。难道他要留在这里让全身冻僵，只因为出现一架全然无害的喷射直升机，触发了他从未察觉的妄想？他兴起一种强烈的冲动，想要离开这片树林，回到那个气象站去。
毕竟，夫铭怕得不得了的那个家伙——丹莫茨尔——怎么会知道，他将在这个时候来到穹顶上，向他们自投罗网？
一时之间，这似乎已成定论。他一而冷得发抖，一面从树干后面走了出来。
但他随即匆匆躲回原处，因为那架飞行器重新出现，而且比刚才更加接近。他没看到它在进行任何类似气象研究的工作，它的动作完全不像是在采样、测量或试验。假如他们真在进行这类工作，他又是否看得出来？他不知道喷射直升机上究竟载有什么仪器，以及那些仪器如何运作。若是他们的确在进行气象研究，他或许也看不出来。然而他能冒险走出去吗？
无论如何，若是丹莫茨尔果真知晓他正在穹顶上呢？这只需要在这所大学工作的一名特务，获悉此事而立刻向他报告。最初，是李松•阮达，那个喜气洋洋、满脸笑容的小个子东方人，建议他到穹顶上来看看。他相当卖力地提出这个建议，但在他们的交谈中，这个话题出现得并不自然——至少有些突无。他有没有可能是政府的特务，而且已经设法通报丹莫茨尔？
还有借他一件毛衣的里根。这件毛衣的确派上用场，可是里根为何不早些告诉他需要毛衣，好让他能为自己准备一件？他现在穿的这件有什么特别吗？它是单纯的紫色，其他人穿的则是川陀流行的花花绿绿。任何人从高空向下眺望，都会看到有个单色斑点在缤纷的色彩中运动，而立刻知道他们要找的是哪一个。
还有克劳吉雅呢？她到穹顶上应该是来学习气象学，并且充当那些气象学家的助手。她怎么可能有时间来找他，跟他悠闲地聊天，不动声色地把他从众人身边引开，将他孤立起来，使他很容易被捉到？
这样想来，铎丝•凡纳比里又如何？她知道他要来穹顶上，却没有阻止这件事。
她应该跟他一道来，可是今天她偏偏很忙。
这是一个阴谋，毫无疑问，这是一个阴谋。
现在他已经说服自己．再也不想离开这些树木的荫庇。（他感到双脚好像两块冰块，跺了几步却似乎根本没用。）那架喷射直升机永远不会走吗？
正当他这样想的时候，引擎的隆隆音调陡然升高，喷射卣升机重新钻入云层，一下子就无影无踪。
谢顿专心倾听，连最小的声音都不放过，最后确定它终于远去。不过，即使在他确定这点之后，仍无法肯定这是不是引他现身的计谋。时间一分一秒慢慢溜走，夜幕渐渐低垂，他却依然留在原处。
最后，当他觉得再不冒险走出来，唯一的可能就是被冻僵而失去知觉时，他终于迈开脚步，小心翼翼地离开树林的荫庇。
毕竟，此时已经暮色苍茫。除非使用热源追踪仪，他们再也无法侦测到他，但若是如此，他就能听见喷射直升机折返的声音。他在树林外等着，心中暗自计数，打算一听到些微声响，就立时躲进树林。不过，一旦他被侦察到，躲回去又会有什么用，他却根本无法想象。
谢顿四下张望，试着寻找那些气象学家，他们都配有人工照明设备，除此之外，不会有其他任何光亮。
他现在还能看清周遭的景物，可是再过一刻钟，顶多半小时，他将什么也看不见。手边没有灯光，头上又是多云的天空，四周将被黑暗笼罩，伸手不见五指。
想到即将被黑暗吞没的可怕后果，谢顿知道必须尽快设法回到那条将他带到此地的干沟，然后循着原路回去。他一面紧抱着双臂保暖，一面朝着心目中那条干沟的方位前进。
当然，树林周围的干沟或许不只一条，但他隐约认出一些来时曾见过的莓果嫩枝，它们现在不再鲜红，几乎成了黑色的果子。他不能再耽搁，必须假设自己的判断正确。借着越来越弱的光线，以及脚下植物的指引，他尽快爬上那条干沟。
可是他不能永远待在干沟中。他已来到自认为附近最高的一座穹顶，找到另一条与他行进方向刚好垂直的干沟。根据他的计算，他现在应该向右转，接着再向左急转，然后只要沿着那条路一直走，就能走到那些气象学家所在的穹顶。
谢顿左转之后，抬起头来，只能刚好看见一座穹顶的轮廓，镶嵌在明亮些许的天空中。一定就是它！
或者，这只是他一厢情愿的想法。
他没有选择余地。只能假设事实并非如此。他尽可能加快脚步向那座穹顶走去，眼睛一直盯着那个顶峰，以便能够尽量沿着直线前进。当他逐渐接近，穹顶显得越来越大时，它镶在天空的轮廓变得越来越不清楚。假使他没有弄错，他很快就会爬上一道缓坡，而当坡度变得水平时，他就能俯瞰另一侧，看到那些气象学家的灯火。
在一片漆黑中，他无法判断路上横亘着什么东西。他好希望至少有几颗星星射出些微光线，于是不禁想到，不知道失明是否便是这种感觉。他一面走一面挥舞双臂，仿佛将它们当成两根触角。
气温一分一秒地降低，他偶尔会停一下，对双手吹一口暖气，再将它们塞在腋下取暖。他突发奇想，真希望双脚也能如法炮制。现在，他想，如果开始降水的话，那一定是下雪，或是更糟的情况——下冰珠。
继续走……继续走，没有其他的选择。
最后，他终于发现自己好像在往下走。如果不是一厢情愿的幻想，就是他已经越过穹顶的顶峰。
他停下脚步。如果他已经越过穹顶的顶峰，应该就能看见气象站的人工照明。他会看到那些气象学家带着灯火到处走动，像萤火虫般闪烁飞舞。
谢顿闭上双眼，仿佛要让它们先适应黑暗，然后再来试试看，不过这举动似乎有点愚蠢。当他闭起眼睛，并未感到比张开时更黑；而当他重新张开眼睛，也不比刚才闭起时更亮一点。
也许里根与其他人都已离去，不但带走了他们的照明设备，还将仪器的灯光全数关闭。不过也可能是谢顿爬上了另一座穹顶；或者他沿着那座穹顶周围的弯路前进，以致如今面对着另一个方向；或是刚才他选错了干沟，从树林出发时就朝错误的方向走去。
他该怎么办？
假如他面对的是另一个方向。还有机会在左方或右方看到光线——可是并没有。若是他选错了于沟，现在不可能再回到那片树林，重新寻找另一条干沟。
他如今唯一的机会，在于假设他面对的方向正确，那个气象站差不多在他的正前方。只不过那些气象学家全走光了，将它留在黑暗中。
那么，往前走吧。成功的机会也许不大，但这是他仅有的机会。
根据他的估计，当初从气象站走到穹顶的顶峰，总共花了半个小时。其中一半路程有克劳吉雅做伴，两人悠闲地走着，没有迈开步伐。而此时此刻，处于令人毛骨悚然的黑暗中，他的步伐比悠闲漫步稍微快了点。
谢顿继续拖着沉重的脚步，有气无力地往前走。若能知道现在儿点就好了，他身上当然有一条计时带，不过在黑暗中……
他停了下来。他戴的是一条川陀计时带，它能显示银河标准时间（如同所有的计时带一样）以及川陀当地时间。计时带通常在黑暗中也有作用，磷光装置让人在昏暗的寝室内也能知晓时间。至少，赫利肯的计时带绝对具有这项功能，川陀计时带又为何没有呢？
他带着迟疑忧虑的心情望着计时带，触摸了一下将电能转换成光能的开关，计时带立刻发出微弱的光芒，告诉他现在时间是一八四七。由于夜晚已经降临，谢顿知道如今一定是冬季——冬至过去多久了？轴倾角是多少度？一年有多长？此时他的位置距离赤道多远？这些问题的线索他连半个也找不到，但重要的是眼前出现了可见的光芒。
他没有失明！不知道为什么，计时带的微弱光辉重新燃起他的希望。
他的精神振奋起来。他要朝那个方向继续前进，要再走上半个小时。假如他什么都没有遇到，他将继续再走五分钟，绝不会再多，就是五分钟。如果他仍旧什么也没遇到，他便要停下来，好好想一想。然而那将是三十五分钟之后的事。在此之前，他要全神贯注向前走，并运用意志使自己感到温暖（他使劲动了动脚趾，仍旧能感到它们的存在）。
谢顿迈着蹒跚的步伐前进，半个小时很快过去。他停了一下，然后犹豫地继续走了五分钟。
现在他必须做出决定。眼前什么也没有，他可能在任何地方，远离任何一个穹顶出口。反之，他也可能站在气象站的左方或右方三米处——甚至更近；他或许与穹顶出口只有两臂之遥，只不过它并未开启。
现在怎么办？
喊叫有没有什么用？除了嗖嗖的风声之外，他被全然的死寂重重包围。如果说穹顶植物中藏有鸟类、野兽或昆虫，也不会在这个季节、这个晚间时刻，或是这个地方出没。此时，只有刺骨的寒风不停袭来。
或许他应该一路不停喊叫。在寒冷的空气中，声音可能传得很远。但是，会有任何人听到他吗？
穹顶里的人会听到他的喊叫吗？有没有任何仪器专门侦测穹顶上的声音或运动？里面会不会有人负责站岗？
这似乎是个可笑的想法。若是真有的话，他们早该听到他的脚步声，不是吗？
然而……
他还是张口喊道：“救命！救命！有没有人听得到？”
他的叫声半卡在喉咙里，还带着几分尴尬。对着虚空的无边黑暗大叫大嚷，似乎是一件愚蠢的事。
不过，他觉得在这种情况下若是迟疑不决，那可是更愚蠢的行为。一阵恐慌逐渐涌现在他心中，他深深吸了一口冷空气，再度开始尖声喊叫，尽可能将叫声拉长。接着他再吸一口气，又以不同的音调发出尖叫。然后又再试了一次。
谢顿暂停叫喊，上气不接下气地转头望向四面八方，虽然他什么也看不见，甚至无法听到回声。除了等待天亮之外，已经没有任何办法。可是在这个季节，夜晚究竟有多长？又会变得多冷呢？
他觉得脸上像是被寒针刺了一下，不久之后又是一下。
那是在如墨的黑暗中落下的冰珠，而他根本无法找到任何遮蔽。
他想，刚才如果让那架喷射直升机发现我，把我抓走，那么情况还要好些。或许我会是一名囚犯，但至少我将感到温暖与舒适。
或者，假如夫铭从来没有插手，我可能早就回到赫利肯；虽然生活在监视之下，却能享有温暖与舒适。现在他所唯一渴望的就是温暖与舒适。
然而此刻他唯一能做的只是等待。他将身子缩成一团，不论夜有多长，他绝不敢入睡，这点他相当明白。他将鞋子脱下，搓了搓冻僵的双脚，然后赶紧重新套上。
他知道整晚必须不断重复这个动作，并且还要摩擦自己的双手与耳朵，以保持血液循环的流畅，而且绝不能让自己睡着。他这么想着，眼睛却不听使唤地合上。在持续落下的冰雹中，他沉沉进入梦乡。
将一切全部仔细想清楚之后，他不知不觉闭上眼睛，然后开始打盹，逐渐进入梦乡，而冰珠仍不停落下。
Chapter 25

It was not quite the end of daylight when Dors Venabili sought out Jenarr Leggen. He answered her rather anxious greeting with a grunt and a brief nod. "Well," she said a trifle impatiently. "How was he?"
Leggen, who was entering data into his computer, said, "How was who?"
"My library student Hari. Dr. Hari Seldon. He went up with you. Was he any help to you?"
Leggen removed his hands from the keys of his computer and swivelled about. "That Heliconian fellow? He was of no use at all. Showed no interest whatever. He kept looking at the scenery when there was no scenery to look at. A real oddball. Why did you want to send him up?"
"It wasnt my idea. He wanted to. I cant understand it. He was very interested. Where is he now?"
Leggen shrugged. "How would I know? Somewhere around."
"Where did he go after he came down with you? Did he say?"
"He didnt come down with us. I told you he wasnt interested."
"Then when did he come down?"
"I dont know. I wasnt watching him. I had an enormous amount of work to do. There must have been a windstorm and some sort of downpour about two days ago and neither was expected. Nothing our instruments showed offered a good explanation for it or for the fact that some sunshine we were expecting today didnt appear. Now Im trying to make sense of it and youre bothering me."
"You mean you didnt see him go down?"
"Look. He wasnt on my mind. The idiot wasnt correctly dressed and I could see that inside of half an hour he wasnt going to be able to take the cold. I gave him a sweater, but that wasnt going to help much for his legs and feet. So I left the elevator open for him and I told him how to use it and explained that it would take him down and then return automatically. It was all very simple and Im sure he did get cold and he did go down and the elevator did come back and then eventually we all went down."
"But you dont know exactly when he went down?"
"No, I dont. I told you. I was busy. He certainly wasnt up there when we left, though, and by that time twilight was coming on and it looked as though it might sleet. So he had to have gone down."
"Did anyone else see him go down?"
"I dont know. Clowzia may have. She was with him for a while. Why dont you ask her?"
Dors found Clowzia in her quarters, just emerging from a hot shower.
"It was cold up there," she said.
Dors said, "Were you with Hari Seldon Upperside?"
Clowzia said, eyebrows lifting, "Yes, for a while. He wanted to wander about and ask questions about the vegetation up there. Hes a sharp fellow, Dors. Everything seemed to interest him, so I told him what I could till Leggen called me back. He was in one of his knock-your-head-off tempers. The weather wasnt working and he--"
Dors interrupted. "Then you didnt see Hari go down in the elevator?"
"I didnt see him at all after Leggen called me over.--But he has to be down here. He wasnt up there when we left."
"But I cant find him anywhere."
Clowzia looked perturbed. "Really?--But hes got to be somewhere down here."
"No, he doesnt have to be somewhere down here," said Dors, her anxiety growing.
"What if hes still up there?"
"Thats impossible. He wasnt. Naturally, we looked about for him before we left. Leggen had shown him how to go down. He wasnt properly dressed and it was rotten weather. Leggen told him if he got cold not to wait for us. He was getting cold. I know! So what else could he do but go down?"
"But no one saw him go down.--Did anything go wrong with him up there?"
"Nothing. Not while I was with him. He was perfectly fine except that he had to be cold, of course."
Dors, by now quite unsettled, said, "Since no one saw him go down, he might still be up there. Shouldnt we go up and look?"
Clowzia said nervously, "I told you we looked around before we went down. It was still quite light and he was nowhere in sight."
"Lets look anyway."
"But I cant take you up there. Im just an intern and I dont have the combination for the Upperside dome opening. Youll have to ask Dr. Leggen."
第二十五章
第六部 拯救
杰纳尔•里根：……他在气象学上虽然颇有贡献，不过与所谓的“里根悬案”相较之下，这些贡献尽皆黯然失色。他的行动曾将哈里•谢顿置于险境，这点已是不争的事实。不过引起众人争论不休的——而且总是一个极富争议性的问题，在于这些行动究竟是无意间导致的结果，抑或是蓄意阴谋的一部分。
争议双方都争得面红耳赤，但即使最深入的研究也无法得出定论。无论如何，在其后的数年之间，这个嫌疑几乎毁掉里根的事业与私生活……
——《银河百科全书》


第二十五章
铎丝•凡纳比里找到杰纳尔•里根的时候，白昼时光尚术完全结束。对于她带着焦虑的问候，他的响应是哼一声，同时随便点了点头。
“好，”她带点不耐烦地说，“他怎么样了？”
里根一面将数据输人计算机，一面说，“谁怎么样了？”
“我的图馆课学生哈里，哈里•谢顿博士。你今天带他一起到上面去，他对你有没有任何帮助？”
里根将双手从计算机键盘上移开，再转过身来。“那个赫利肯佬？他一点用都没有，也未显出任何兴趣。他一直在看风景，其实根本没有风景可看。真是个怪人，你为什么要让他上去？”
“那不是我的主意，是他自己想去的。我无法了解，但他的确很有兴趣——现在他在哪里？”
里根耸了耸肩：“我怎么会知道？在附近哪个地方吧。”
“跟你们一起下来之后，他到哪里去了？他有没有说？”
“他没有跟我们一起下来。我跟你说过他没兴趣。”
“那么，他是什么时候下来的？”
“我不知道，我没看着他，我有一大堆事要做。大约在两天之前，一定曾有一场风暴或某种暴雨，两者都是始料未及的。我们预期今天会出现的阳光，却又偏偏不肯露脸。我们的仪器显示的数据，全都无法作出一个好的解释。现在我正试图把这些弄明白，而你却在打扰我。”
“你的意思是说，你没看到他下来？”
“听着。我根本未曾想到他。那个白痴没穿对衣服，我看得出来，不到半小时他就无法忍受上面的寒冷。我给了他一件毛衣，但那对他的腿和脚没什么帮助。所以我让升降机开着，并且告诉他如何使用；我对他解释，说升降机把他带下去之后，会自动回到上面来。整个程序非常简单，我确定他果真耐不住寒冷，果真提早离去，然后升降机又回到上面，最后我们也都下来了。”
“可是，你不晓得他究竟是何时下来的？”
“是，我不知道。我告诉过你，我当时很忙。不过当我们离开时，他的确不在那里。而且，那时暮色即将降临，看来好像还要下冰珠，所以他必定早就离开了。”
“有没有任何人看到他下来？”
“我不知道。克劳吉雅也许看到了。她曾经跟他在一起，你为什么不去问她？”
铎丝在克劳吉雅的寝室找到她，她刚冲完一个热水浴。
“上面可真冷。”她说。
铎丝说：“在穹顶上时，你和哈里•谢顿在一起吗？”
克劳吉雅扬起眉毛，答道：“是的，有一阵子。他想要到处走走，还问了些有关该处植物的问题。他是个心思敏锐的人，铎丝。每件事物似乎都会引起他的兴趣，所以我尽量把知道的全告诉他，直到里根把我叫回去为止。当时他的脾气坏得想杀人，天气并不理想，而他……”
铎丝插嘴道：“那么，你没有看到哈里搭升降机下来？”
“里根把我叫回去之后，我就再也没看到他——不过他一定下来了，我们离开的时候，他已经不在上面。”
“可是我到处都找不到他。”
克劳吉雅看来也慌了：“真的？可是他一定在下面哪个地方。”
“不，他不一定非得在下面哪个地方。”铎丝越来越焦急，“万一他还在上面呢？”
“那是不可能的，他不在上面。在我们离开之前，我们自然到处找了找。里根曾教他如何下来，他的衣服不够，而且当时天气很糟。里根告诉他，如果觉得冷就不必等我们。那时他已经开始觉得冷了，我知道！所以除了下来之外，他还会做什么呢？”
“可是没有人亲眼看到他下来——他在上面有没有出什么状况？”
“绝对没有，至少我跟他在一起时没有。他好得很——当然，除了一定觉得冷之外。”
铎丝此时心乱如麻，又说：“既然没人看到他下来，他就可能还在上面。我们不该上去看看吗？”
克劳吉雅紧张兮兮地说：“我告诉过你，我们下来之前到处找过了。当时天色还相当亮，谁也没见到他的踪影。”
“我们还是去看看吧。”
“可是我无法带你上去。我只是个见习生，没有开启穹顶出口的密码，你得去求里根博士。”
Chapter 26

Dors Venabili knew that Leggen would not willingly go Upperside now. He would have to be forced.
First, she checked the library and the dining areas again. Then she called Seldons room. Finally, she went up there and signaled at the door. When Seldon did not respond, she had the floor manager open it. He wasnt there. She questioned some of those who, over the last few weeks, had come to know him. No one had seen him.
Well, then, she would make Leggen take her Upperside. By now, though, it was night. He would object strenuously and how long could she spend arguing if Hari Seldon was trapped up there on a freezing night with sleet turning to snow?
A thought occurred to her and she rushed to the small University computer, which kept track of the doings of the students, faculty, and service staff. Her fingers flew over the keys and she soon had what she wanted. There were three of them in another part of the campus. She signed out for a small glidecart to take her over and found the domicile she was looking for. Surely, one of them would be available--or findable. Fortune was with her. The first door at which she signaled was answered by a query light. She punched in her identification number, which included her department affiliation. The door opened and a plump middle-aged man stared out at her. He had obviously been washing up before dinner. His dark blond hair was askew and he was not wearing any upper garment. He said, "Sorry. You catch me at a disadvantage. What can I do for you, Dr. Venabili?"
She said a bit breathlessly, "Youre Rogen Benastra, the Chief Seismologist, arent you?"
"Yes."
"This is an emergency. I must see the seismological records for Upperside for the last few hours."
Benastra stared at her. "Why? Nothings happened. Id know if it had. The seismograph would inform us."
"Im not talking about a meteoric impact."
"Neither am I. We dont need a seismograph for that. Im talking about gravel, pinpoint fractures. Nothing today."
"Not that either. Please. Take me to the seismograph and read it for me. This is life or death."
"I have a dinner appointment--"
"I said life or death and I mean it."
Benastra said, "I dont see--" but he faded out under Dorss glare. He wiped his face, left quick word on his message relay, end struggled into a shirt. They half-ran (under Dorss pitiless urging) to the small squat Seismology Building.
Dors, who knew nothing about seismology, said, "Down? Were going down?"
"Below the inhabited levels. Of course. The seismograph has to be fixed to bedrock and be removed from the constant clamor and vibration of the city levels."
"But how can you tell whats happening Upperside from down here?"
"The seismograph is wired to a set of pressure transducers located within the thickness of the dome. The impact of a speck of grit will send the indicator skittering off the screen. We can detect the flattening effect on the dome of a high wind. We can--"
"Yes, yes," said Dors impatiently. She was not here for a lecture on the virtues and refinements of the instruments. "Can you detect human footsteps?"
"Human footsteps?" Benastra looked confused. "Thats not likely Upperside."
"Of course its likely. There were a group of meteorologists Upperside this afternoon."
"Oh. Well, footsteps would scarcely be noticeable."
"It would be noticeable if you looked hard enough and thats what I want you to do."
Benastra might have resented the firm note of command in her voice, but, if so, he said nothing. He touched a contact and the computer screen jumped to life. At the extreme right center, there was a fat spot of light, from which a thin horizontal line stretched to the left limit of the screen. There was a tiny wriggle to it, a random non-repetitive seder of little hiccups and these moved steadily leftward. It was almost hypnotic in its effect on Dors.
Benastra said, "Thats as quiet as it can possibly be. Anything you see is the result of changing air pressure above, raindrops maybe, the distant whirr of machinery. Theres nothing up there."
"All right, but what about a few hours ago? Check on the records at fifteen hundred today, for instance. Surely, you have some recordings."
Benastra gave the computer its necessary instructions and for a second or two there was wild chaos on the screen. Then it settled down and again the horizontal line appeared.
"Ill sensitize it to maximum," muttered Benastra. There were now pronounced hiccups and as they staggered leftward they changed in pattern markedly.
"Whats that?" said Dors. "Tell me."
"Since you say there were people up there, Venabili, I would guess they were footsteps--the shifting of weight, the impact of shoes. I dont know that I would have guessed it if I hadnt known about the people up there. Its what we call a benign vibration, not associated with anything we know to be dangerous."
"Can you tell how many people are present?"
"Certainly not by eye. You see, were getting a resultant of all the impacts."
"You say not by eye. Can the resultant be analyzed into its components by the computer?"
"I doubt it. These are minimal effects and you have to allow for the inevitable noise. The results would be untrustworthy."
"Well then. Move the time forward till the footstep indications stop. Can you make it fast-forward, so to speak?"
"If I do--the kind of fast-forward youre speaking of--then it will all just blur into a straight line with a slight haze above and below. What I can do is move it forward in fifteen-minute stages and study it quickly before moving on."
"Good. Do that!"
Both watched the screen until Benastra said, "Theres nothing there now. See?"
There was again a line with nothing but tiny uneven hiccups of noise.
"When did the footsteps stop?"
"Two hours ago. A trifle more."
"And when they stopped were there fewer than there were earlier?"
Benastra looked mildly outraged. "I couldnt tell. I dont think the finest analysis could make a certain decision."
Dors pressed her lips together. Then she said, "Are you testing a transducer--is that what you called it--near the meteorological outlet?"
"Yes, thats where the instruments are and thats where the meteorologists would have been." Then, unbelievingly, "Do you want me to try others in the vicinity? One at a time?"
"No. Stay on this one. But keep on going forward at fifteen-minute intervals. One person may have been left behind and may have made his way back to the instruments."
Benastra shook his head and muttered something under his breath.
The screen shifted again and Dors said sharply, "Whats that?" She was pointing.
"I dont know. Noise."
"No. Its periodic. Could it be a single persons footsteps?"
"Sure, but it could be a dozen other things too."
"Its coming along at about the time of footsteps, isnt it?" Then, after a while, she said, "Push it forward a little."
He did and when the screen settled down she said, "Arent those unevennesses getting bigger?"
"Possibly. We can measure them."
"We dont have to. You can see theyre getting bigger. The footsteps are approaching the transducer. Go forward again. See when they stop."
After a while Benastra said, "They stopped twenty or twenty-five minutes ago."
Then cautiously, "Whatever they are."
"Theyre footsteps," said Dors with mountain-moving conviction. "Theres a man up there and while you and I have been fooling around here, hes collapsed and hes going to freeze and die. Now dont say, Whatever they are! Just call Meteorology and get me Jenarr Leggen. Life or death, I tell you. Say so!"
Benastra, lips quivering, had passed the stage where he could possibly resist anything this strange and passionate woman demanded. It took no more than three minutes to get Leggens hologram on the message platform.
He had been pulled away from his dinner table. There was a napkin in his hand and a suspicious greasiness under his lower lip. His long face was set in a fearful scowl. " Life or death? What is this? Who are you?" Then his eye caught Dors, who had moved closer to Benastra so that her image would be seen on Jenarrs screen. He said, "You again. This is simple harassment."
Dors said, "It is not. I have consulted Rogen Benastra, who is Chief Seismologist at the University. After you and your party had left Upperside, the seismograph shows clear footsteps of one person still there. Its my student Hari Seldon, who went up there in your care and who is now, quite certainly, lying in a collapsed stupor and may not live long.
"You will, therefore, take me up there right now with whatever equipment may be necessary. If you do not do so immediately, I shall proceed to University security--to the President himself, if necessary. One way or another Ill get up there and if anything has happened to Hari because you delay one minute, I will see to it that you are hauled in for negligence, incompetence--whatever I can make stick--and will have you lose all status and be thrown out of academic life. And if hes dead, of course, thats manslaughter by negligence. Or worse, since Ive now warned you hes dying."
Jenarr, furious, turned to Benastra. "Did you detect--"
But Dors cut in. "He told me what he detected and Ive told you. I do not intend to allow you to bulldoze him into confusion. Are you coming? Now?"
"Has it occurred to you that you may be mistaken?" said Jenarr, thin-lipped.
"Do you know what I can do to you if this is a mischievous false alarm? Loss of status works both ways."
"Murder doesnt," said Dors. "Im ready to chance a trial for malicious mischief. Are you ready to chance a trial for murder?"
Jenarr reddened, perhaps more at the necessity of giving in than at the threat. "Ill come, but Ill have no mercy on you, young woman, if your student eventually turns out to have been safe within the dome these past three hours."

第二十六章
　　铎丝•凡纳比里知道里根现在一定不愿到穹顶上去，必须强迫他才行。
首先，她又到图书馆与用餐区巡视一遍，然后打电话到谢顿的房间。最后，她走到他的宿舍门口，按下门上的讯号钮。在确定无人应门之后，她请来该层的管理员将门打开，发现他果然不在里面。她问了几个过去数周以来与谢顿结识的人，但没有一个曾经看到他。
好吧，她只好硬逼里根带她到穹顶上去。不过现在已经入夜，他一定会极力拒绝。在这个能冻死人的夜晚，冰珠眼看就要转为雪花，哈里•谢顿若是果真困在上面，她还能浪费多少时间与里根争论？
她突然冒化一个念头，立刻冲到一台小型“大学计算机”前，这种计算机专门记录所有学生与教员的最新状况。
她的手指在键盘下飞舞，很快就找到她要的数据。
有三个人可以求助，他们都住在校园另一角。她召来一辆小型滑车将她载到那里，找到了她要找的那栋宿舍。不用说，他们之中至少该有一个在家——或者找得到。
这回她很章运。她按下第一个房门下的讯号钮，询问灯便随即亮起。她键入她的身份识别号码，其中包括她所隶属的学系。房门打开后，一个胖胖的中年男子好奇地盯着她。他显然正在梳洗，准备出去吃晚餐。他的深色金发凌乱不堪，而且上身未穿任何衣服。
他说：“很抱歉，你来得真不是时候。找我有事吗，凡纳比里博士？”
她微微喘着气问道：“你就是罗根•班纳斯楚，首席地震学家，对吗？”
“没错。”
“这是紧急事件，我必须看看过去几小时内穹顶上的地震记录。”
班纳斯楚瞪着她：“为什么？什么事都没发生。如果有我一定知道，地震仪会通知我们。”
“我不是指流星撞击。”
“我也不是，那还轮不到用地震仪。我是指沙砾造成的细微裂缝，今天一个也没有。”
“我指的也不是那种情况。拜托，带我去地震仪那里，帮我解读一下，这是生死攸关的大事。”
“我有个晚餐约会……”
“我说生死攸关，可不是在开玩笑。”
班纳斯楚说：“我不懂……”们在铎丝的瞪视下，他的话只说了一半。他擦了擦脸，对着留言机很快说了一句，然后慌忙套上一件衬衣。
他们小跑步（在铎丝毫不留情的催促下）前往矮小的地震学中心。对地震学一窍不通的铎丝问道：“往下？我们在往下走？”
“要到居住层之下，这是理所当然的事。地震仪必须固定在底盘岩上，远离都会层的恒常扰攘和震动。”
“可是在这下面，你怎能知道穹顶上发生了什么事？”
“地震仪和装在穹顶夹层的一组压力转换器有电线相连，即使一粒沙砾的撞击，也会使屏幕指针开始跳动。我们能侦测到强风撼动穹顶的效应，还可以……”
“很好，很好：”铎丝不耐烦地说，她来这里不是为了学习这些仪器的优点与精巧程度，“你能侦测到人类的脚步吗？”
“人类的脚步？”班纳斯楚露出困惑的表情，“穹顶上不太可能有人。”
“当然町能，今天下午就有一群气象学家到穹顶上去。”
“喔，嗯，脚步几乎辨识不出来。”
“如果你看得足够认真，就可以把它辨识出来，我要你做的就是这件事。”
班纳斯楚或许痛恨她那种坚决的命令口吻，不过即使真是这样，他也完全未说出口。他只是按下一个开关，计算机屏幕便显现从画面。
画面右缘中央有个粗大的光点，一条水平细线从那里一直延伸到屏幕的左方边界。水平线正在轻轻蠕动，那是一组随机、绝不重复的微弱起伏，稳定地向左方前进。铎丝感到它几乎有催眠作用。
班纳斯楚说：“这是再平静不过的情况。你所看见的，全都是上面的气压变化，也可能是雨滴，或是远处机械装置运转造成的结果。上面什么也没有。”
“好吧，可是几小时之前又如何呢？比如说，检查一下今天一五○○时的记录吧。你当然有些那时的记录。”
班纳斯楚对计算机下了必要的指令，一两秒钟之后，屏幕上便出现一片混乱混沌。画面不久平静下来，那条水平线再度出现。
“我要把灵敏度调到最大。”班纳斯楚喃喃说道。现在那种起伏变得十分明显，当它们向左方蹒跚游移时，它们的图样也同时发生显著变化。
“那是什么？”铎丝说，“告诉我。”
“既然你说上面曾经有人，凡纳比里，我猜它们代表的就是脚步，包括重量的挪移、鞋子的撞击。若非事先知道上面有人，我不晓得还能不能猜到这一点。这是我们所谓的良性震动，与我们所知的任何危险现象无关。”
“你能不能看出共有多少人？”
“肉眼当然看不出来。你可知道，我们看到的是所有撞击的合成效应。”
“你说‘肉眼’看不出来，那能不能利用计算机，将这种合成效应解析成个别成分？”
“我怀疑这个可能性。这些都是极小的效应，我们还得考虑无所不在的噪声，否则，分析结果不会可靠的。”
“好吧，那么将时间再往前推，直到脚步讯号消失为止。比如说，能不能让它正向快转？”
“如果我那样做——你所谓的正向快转，整个画面会变得模糊，只剩下一条直线，上下各有一片朦胧的光影。我能做的是让它每次向前跳十五分钟，迅速观察一下，然后继续这个程序。”
“好，就这样做！’，
两人定睛盯着屏幕，直到班纳斯楚说：“现在什么都没有了，看到没有？”
屏幕上又剩下一条直线，除此之外只有噪声的微小起伏。
“脚步什么时候消失的？”
“两小时以前，呃，再早一些。”
“当它们消失的时候，是不是比原先的脚步少了些？”
班纳斯楚看来有点冒火。“我看不出来，我想即使是最精密的分析，也无法做出肯定的判断。”
铎丝紧抿一下嘴唇，接着又说：“你是不是正在检查靠近气象侦测站的那个转换器——你管它叫转换器是吗？”
“是的，我们的仪器就在那里，那些气象学家当时也该在那里。”然后，他又以不敢置信的口吻说：“你想要我试试附近其他的？一个一个试？”
“不，就留在那里，不过继续以十五分为间隔向前推进。有个人也许落在后面，也许后来才回到仪器附近。”
班纳斯楚摇摇头，低声咕哝了几句。
屏幕再度开始变换，铎丝突然指着屏幕喊道：那是什么？”
“我不知道，噪声吧。”
不对，他是周期性的。有没有可能是单独一人的脚步？”
“当然可能，但也可能是十几种其他现象。”
“它的变化和步行的快慢差不多，对不对？”过了一会儿，她又说：“再向前推一点。”
他照做了。等屏幕稳定下来之后，她说：“这些凹凸不平是不是越来越大？”
“可能吧，我们可以测量一下。”
“我们不必了，你可以看出它们越来越大，代表那些脚步逐渐接近转换器。再往前走，看看它们什么时候消失。”
又过了一会儿，班纳斯楚说：“它们在二十或二十五分钟之前消失了。”
然后，他又谨慎地补充一句：“不论那是什么。”
“就是脚步。”铎丝以毋庸置疑的信心，斩钉截铁地说，“还有一个人在上面，当你我在这里浪费时间的时候，他已经瘫倒在地，马上就要冻死。不要再说‘不论那是什么’，赶紧打电话到气象学系，帮我找杰纳尔•里根。生死攸关，我告诉你。就这么说！”
班纳斯楚的嘴唇开始打颤，到了这个地步，他再也无法违抗这个古怪而愤怒的女人下达的任何命令。
不到三分钟，里根的全息像便在讯息平台出现。他是从晚餐餐桌上被拉下来的，手中还握着一条餐巾，嘴唇下面油腻腻的，不知是什么东西。
他的长脸露出可怕的阴沉表情：“生死攸关！这是怎么回事？你是什么人？”然后他看到了铎丝，她故意凑近班纳斯楚，好让她的影像出现在杰纳尔的屏幕上。于是他说：“又是你，这根本就是骚扰：”
铎丝说：“这不是骚扰。我已经咨询过罗根•班纳斯楚，他是本校的首席地震学家。在你和你的小组离开穹顶上之后，地震仪又显示出清楚的脚步，代表还有一个人留在那里。那就是我的学生哈里•谢顿，当初他是在你的监护之下上去的，如今我们相当肯定，他已经倒地昏迷不醒，可能活不了多久。因此，现在你必须带我上去，并且带着一切必要装备。假如你不立刻照办，我就去找校方安全单位——甚至找校长本人，若有必要的话。我总有办法上去的，要是因为你耽误了哪怕一分钟，而让哈里有个三长两短短，我保证会拿失职、无能，以及我能安在你身上的任何罪名，让你吃上官司，让你丧失所有的地位，并被赶出学术圈。而如果他不幸丧生，当然，那就是过失杀人——或者还更糟，因为我现在已警告过你，他快要死了。”
火冒三丈的杰纳尔转向班纳斯楚：“你是否侦测到……”
但是铎丝突然打断他的话：“他把侦测到的全告诉了我，我刚刚已经转述过了：我不准备让你把他吓得心神恍惚。你到底来不来？啊？”
“你有没有想到过，也许是你自己弄错了？”杰纳尔以刻薄的口气说，“你知不知道，如果这是个假警报的恶作剧，我会怎样对付你？丧失地位一样会应验在你身上。”
“谋杀罪却不会，”铎丝说，“我已准备好冒着被控恶作剧的危险，你是否准备冒着被控谋杀罪的危险？”
杰纳尔涨红了脸。这也许是因为他不得不去，而非因为受到威胁向对方低头。“我会来的。小过，小姐，如果最后事实证明，在过去三个小时中，你的学生安然无事地待在穹顶内，我绝不会对你客气。”
Chapter 27

The three went up the elevator in an inimical silence. Leggen had eaten only part of his dinner and had left his wife at the dining area without adequate explanation. Benastra had eaten no dinner at all and had possibly disappointed some woman companion, also without adequate explanation. Dors Venabili had not eaten either and she seemed the most tense and unhappy of the three. She carried a thermal blanket and two photonic founts.
When they reached the entrance to Upperside, Leggen, jaw muscles tightening, entered his identification number and the door opened. A cold wind rushed at them and Benastra grunted. None of the three was adequately dressed, but the two men had no intention of remaining up there long.
Dors said tightly, "Its snowing."
Leggen said, "Its wet snow. The temperatures just about at the freezing point. Its not a killing frost."
"It depends on how long one remains in it, doesnt it?" said Dors. "And being soaked in melting snow wont help."
Leggen grunted. "Well, where is he?" He stared resentfully out into utter blackness, made even worse by the light from the entrance behind him. Dors said, "Here, Dr. Benastra, hold this blanket for me. And you, Dr. Leggen, close the door behind you without locking it."
"Theres no automatic lock on it. Do you think were foolish?"
"Perhaps not, but you can lock it from the inside and leave anyone outside unable to get into the dome."
"If someones outside, point him out. Show him to me," said Leggen.
"He could be anywhere." Dors lifted her arms with a photonic fount circling each wrist.
"We cant look everywhere," mumbled Benastra miserably. The founts blazed into light, spraying in every direction. The snowflakes glittered like a vast mob of fireflies, making it even more difficult to see.
"The footsteps were getting steadily louder," said Dors. "He had to be approaching the transducer. Where would it be located?"
"I havent any idea," snapped Leggen.--Thats outside my field and my responsibility."
"Dr. Benastra?"
Benastras reply was hesitant. "I dont really know. To tell you the truth, Ive never been up here before. It was installed before my time. The computer knows, but we never thought to ask it that.--Im cold and I dont see what use I am up here."
"Youll have to stay up here for a while," said Dors firmly. "Follow me. Im going to circle the entrance in an outward spiral."
"We cant see much through the snow," said Leggen.
"I know that. If it wasnt snowing, wed have seen him by now. Im sure of it. As it is, it may take a few minutes. We can stand that." She was by no means as confident as her words made it appear.
She began to walk, swinging her arms, playing the light over as large a field as she could, straining her eyes for a dark blotch against the snow.
And, as it happened, it was Benastra who first said, "Whats that?" and pointed.
Dors overlapped the two founts, making a bright cone of light in the indicated direction. She ran toward it, as did the other two. They had found him, huddled and wet, about ten meters from the door, five from the nearest meteorological device. Dors felt for his heartbeat, but it was not necessary for, responding to her touch, Seldon stirred and whimpered.
"Give me the blanket, Dr. Benastra," said Dors in a voice that was faint with relief. She flapped it open and spread it out in the snow. "Lift him onto it carefully and Ill wrap him. Then well carry him down."
In the elevator, vapors were rising from the wrapped Seldon as the blanket warmed to blood temperature.
Dors said, "Once we have him in his room, Dr. Leggen, you get a doctor--a good one--and see that he comes at once. If Dr. Seldon gets through this without harm, I wont say anything, but only if he does. Remember--"
"You neednt lecture me," said Leggen coldly. "I regret this and I will do what I can, but my only fault was in allowing this man to come Upperside in the first place."
The blanket stirred and a low, weak voice made itself heard. Benastra started, for Seldons head was cradled in the crook of his elbow. He said, "Hes trying to say something."
Dors said, "I know. He said, Whats going on? "
She couldnt help but laugh just a little. It seemed such a normal thing to say.
第二十七章
　　三人在直达穹顶上的升降机中，保持着一种充满敌意的沉默。里根的晚餐只吃了一半，没有做充分的解释，就将妻子独自留在用餐区。班纳斯楚根本没进晚餐，可能还令某位女伴大失所望，而他一样来不及解释。铎丝•凡纳比里同样没吃任何东西，在他们三人之间，她似乎是最紧张、最不好受的一位。她带了一条热力毯，以及两个光子源。
当他们到达穹顶上的人口时，里根紧绷面部肌肉，将他的身份识别号码一一输入，门随即打开。一阵冷风立刻袭来，班纳斯楚不禁哼了一声。他们三人全都穿得不够，不过两位男上并未打算在上面久留。
铎丝以生硬的声音说：“下雪了。”
里根说：“这是‘湿雪’，温度刚好在冰点上下，它并不是‘杀霜’。”
“那要看你在里面待多久而定，对不对？”铎丝说，“而浸在融雪里也没什么好处。”
里根咕哝道：“好了，他在哪里？”他愤愤地瞪着眼前全然的黑暗，由于他身后入口处透出光线，能见度变得更差。
铎丝说：“来，班纳斯楚博士，帮我拿这条毯子。而你，里根博士，把你身后的门关上，不过别锁起来。”
“门上没有自动锁，你以为我们是傻瓜啊！”
“也许不是，不过你能从里面把它锁上，让留在外面的人无法进入穹顶。”
“如果有人在外面，把他指出来，让我看一看。”里根说。
“他可能在任何角落。”铎丝举起双臂，两个光子源分别绕在她的左右腕。
“我们不可能查看每一个角落。”班纳斯楚可怜兮兮地喃喃说道。
此时光子源发出亮光，将光子洒向四面八方。雪花被照得闪闪发亮，好像一大群萤火虫，使得视线更加受阻。
“脚步声最初稳定地增大，”铎丝说，“他一定逐渐在接近转换器。它会装设在哪里呢？”
“我毫无概念。”里根吼道，“这不是我的本行，也不是我的责任。”
“班纳斯楚博士？”
班纳斯楚的回答显得很迟疑：“其实我也不知道，老实跟跟你说，以前我从未来过这里。它是在我接管之前装没的，计算机知道确切位置，但我们一直没有想到问它——呵，我觉得好冷，我看不出我在这里有什么用。”
“你必须在这里再待一会儿。”铎丝坚决说道，“跟我来，我要以入口为中心，由内向外沿着螺线绕圈圈。”
“我们在雪中看不到什么。”里根说。
“我知道。如果没下雪，我们早就看到他了。现在这种情况，大概需要花上几分钟的时间，我们还能受得了。”虽然她说得信心十足，内心却毫无把握。
她开始行动，一面不停挥动双臂，把光线的照射范嗣尽量拉大，一面极目寻找白雪中的黑暗斑点。
结果是班纳斯楚最先发现：“那是什么？”他一面说。一面伸手指去。
铎丝让两个光子源重叠，沿着他所指的方向形成一个明亮的光锥。然后她赶紧跑过去，另外两人紧跟在后。
他们果然找到他了。他缩成一团，全身湿透，距离门口大约十米，距离最近的气象装置只有五米左右。铎丝伸手想探探他的心跳，随即发现没有这个必要，因为在她的触摸下，谢顿立刻抖动一下，同时发出一声呻吟。
“把毯子给我，班纳斯楚博士。”铎丝的声音总算放松一点。她将毯子“啪”地一声抖开，铺到了雪地下。“将他小心地抬到上面，我要把他裹起来，然后我们抱他下去。”
在升降机中，当热力毯加热到血液的温度时，裹在里头的谢顿开始浑身冒出蒸汽。
铎丝说：“我们把他送到他的房间后，里根博士，你马上去找医生——找个好的，并且务必让他立刻赶来。假如谢顿博士安然度过这一关，没有任何三长两短，我就什么也不再提——但唯有在这个前提之下。记住……”
“你不必教训我，”里根冷冷应道，“我为此感到遗憾，我会尽力负责到底。可是我唯一犯的错误，就是当初竟然准许此人到穹顶上去。”
热力毯动了一下，传出一声微小、虚弱的声音。
班纳斯楚吓了一跳，因为谢顿的头正好枕在他的臂弯中。他说：“他想要说些什么。”
铎丝说：“我知道，他在问：‘发生了什么事？”’她忍不住小声笑出来，他会这么说似乎是很自然的事。
Chapter 28

The doctor was delighted.
"Ive never seen a case of exposure," he explained. "One doesnt get exposed on Trantor."
"That may be," said Dors coldly, "and Im happy you have the chance to experience this novelty, but does it mean that you do not know how to treat Dr. Seldon?"
The doctor, an elderly man with a bald head and a small gray mustache, bristled. "Of course, I do. Exposure cases on the Outer Worlds are common enough--an everyday affair--and Ive read a great deal about them." Treatment consisted in part of an antiviral serum and the use of a microwave wrapping.
"This ought to take care of it," the doctor said. "On the Outer Worlds, they make use of much more elaborate equipment in hospitals, but we dont have that, of course, on Trantor. This is a treatment for mild cases and Im sure it will do the job."
Dors thought later, as Seldon was recovering without particular injury, that it was perhaps because he was an Outworlder that he had survived so well. Dark, cold, even snow were not utterly strange to him. A Trantorian probably would have died in a similar case, not so much from physical trauma as from psychic shock.
She was not sure of this, of course, since she herself was not a Trantorian either.
And, turning her mind away from these thoughts, she pulled up a chair near to Haris bed and settled down to wait.
第二十八章
　　医牛显得很开心。
“我从来没见过感冒症。”他解释道，“在川陀没有人会感冒。”
“或许是这样，”铎丝以冷淡的口气说，“我很高兴你有机会体验这个新奇病例。但这是否代表说，你不知道如何医治谢顿博士？”
这位蓄着两小撇灰胡子的秃头老医生，此时突然怒发冲冠。“我当然知道。感冒症在外围世界相当普通，简直是家常便饭。而且我渎过一大堆病例。”
治疗的方法包括注射抗病毒血清，以及使用微波包裹。
“这样应该可以了。”医生说，“在外围世界的医院中，他们会使用更精致的设备，不过在川陀上，我们不会有那些设备。这只是对轻微症状的治疗，我确定它会生效。”
当谢顿逐渐恢复，并未显现任何后遗症时，铎丝曾经想，他能大难不死，或许是因为他是外星人士。黑暗、寒冷，甚至冰雪，对他而言都不是全然陌生的事物。
而处在类似情况下，一个川陀人可能就会丧命，致命的主因并非生理上的创伤，而是心理下的震撼。
不过，她无法确定这一点，因为她自己也不是川陀人。
拂去这些思绪，她拉过一张椅子，坐到谢顿的床边，开始耐心地等待。
Chapter 29

On the second morning Seldon stirred awake and looked up at Dors, who sat at his bedside, viewing a book-film and taking notes. In a voice that was almost normal, Seldon said, "Still here, Dors?"
She put down the book-film. "I cant leave you alone, can I? And I dont trust anyone else."
"It seems to me that every time I wake up, I see you. Have you been here all the time?"
"Sleeping or waking, yes."
"But your classes?"
"I have an assistant who has taken over for a while." Dors leaned over and grasped Haris hand. Noticing his embarrassment (he was, after all, in bed), she removed it.
"Hari, what happened? I was so frightened."
Seldon said, "I have a confession to make."
"What is it, Hari?"
"I thought perhaps you were part of a conspiracy--"
"A conspiracy?" she said vehemently.
"I mean, to maneuver me Upperside where Id be outside University jurisdiction and therefore subject to being picked up by Imperial forces."
"But Upperside isnt outside University jurisdiction. Sector jurisdiction on Trantor is from the planetary center to the sky."
"Ah, I didnt know that. But you didnt come with me because you said you had a busy schedule and, when I was getting paranoid, I thought you were deliberately abandoning me. Please forgive me. Obviously, it was you who got me down from there. Did anyone else care?"
"They were busy men," said Dors carefully. "They thought you had come down earlier. I mean, it was a legitimate thought."
"Clowzia thought so too?"
"The young intern? Yes, she did."
"Well, it may still have been a conspiracy. Without you, I mean."
"No, Hari, it is my fault. I had absolutely no right to let you go Upperside alone. It was my job to protect you. I cant stop blaming myself for what happened, for you getting lost."
"Now, wait a minute," said Seldon, suddenly irritated. "I didnt get lost. What do you think I am?"
"Id like to know what you call it. You were nowhere around when the others left and you didnt get back to the entrance--or to the neighborhood of the entrance anyway--till well after dark."
"But thats not what happened. I didnt get lost just because I wandered away and couldnt find my way back. I told you I was suspecting a conspiracy and I had cause to do so. Im not totally paranoid."
"Well then, what did happen?"
Seldon told her. He had no trouble remembering it in full detail; he had lived with it in nightmare for most of the preceding day.
Dors listened with a frown. "But thats impossible. A jet-down? Are you sure?"
"Of course Im sure. Do you think I was hallucinating?"
"But the Imperial forces could not have been searching for you. They could not have arrested you Upperside without creating the same ferocious rumpus they would have if they had sent in a police force to arrest you on campus."
"Then how do you explain it?"
"Im not sure," said Dors, "but its possible that the consequences of my failure to go Upperside with you might have been worse than they were and that Hummin will be seriously angry with me."
"Then lets not tell him," said Seldon. "It ended well."
"We must tell him," said Dors grimly. "This may not be the end."
第二十九章
　　第二天早上，谢顿缓缓醒过来，一眼就看到铎丝。她正坐在他的床边，一面读着一本胶卷书，一面做着笔记。
谢顿以近乎正常的声音说：“还在这儿，铎丝？”
她将胶卷书放下来：“我不能让你一个人在这里，对不对？而我也信不过其他人。”
“好像我每次醒来的时候，我都会看到你。你一直待在这里吗？”《基地前奏》（上）-209.JPG.TXT“不论你是睡是醒，我都没有离开。”
“可是你的课呢？”
“我有一个助教，可以暂时帮我代一下课。”
铎丝俯下身来，抓住谢顿的一只手。但她马上注意到他的尴尬（毕竟他躺在床上），于是又将手缩回去。
“哈里，发生了什么事？把我吓坏了。”
谢顿说：“我要招认一件事。”
“什么事，哈里？”
“我本以为你或许也参与一个阴谋……”
“一个阴谋？”她很激动地说。
“我的意思是说，把我引到穹顶上去，这样我就离开了大学的管辖范围，帝国军警就可以将我抓去。”
“可是穹顶上并未脱离大学的管辖范围，川陀各区的管辖范围是从星核一直延伸到空中。”
“啊。我可不知道。但你并未跟我一起去，因为你说你的日程很忙，而当我开始妄想时，便想到你是故意要遗弃我。请你原谅。显然，是你把我从那里救下来的，除你之外，还有谁会关心呢？”
“他们都是大忙人。”铎丝以谨慎的口吻说，“他们以为你早就下来了。我的意思是说，那还算是个合理的设想。”
“克劳吉雅也这样想？”
“那个年轻见习生？对，她也一样。”
“嗯，这仍有可能是一个阴谋，我的意思是不包括你在内。”
“不，哈里，这的确是我的错。我绝对无权让你独自到穹顶上去，保护你是我的工作。我无法不自责，我竟然让这种事发生，竟然让你迷路。”
“嘿，等一等。”谢顿突然发火，“我没有迷路，你把我当成什么了？”
“我倒想知道你管它叫什么。当他们离去时，到处都找不到你，而且一直到天黑许久之后，你才回到人口处——或者应该说入口处附近。”
“可是事实并非如此。不是因为我到处乱跑，找不到归途才迷路的。我告诉过你，我怀疑有一个阴谋，而且有理由这样怀疑，我没有全然陷入妄想。”
“好吧，那么，究竟发生了什么事？”
于是谢顿一五一十告诉了她。他毫无困难就能记起全部的经过细节。过去几乎一整天的时间，他都在器梦中不断重温那些经历。
铎丝一面听，一面皱着眉头：“但这是不可能的事。一架喷射直升机，你确定吗？”
“当然确定。你认为那是我的幻觉吗？”
“可是帝国军警绝不可能搜捕你。假如他们在穹顶上将你逮捕，造成的反应将和派遣警力在校园逮捕你一样严重。”
“那你要怎么解释呢？”
“我不确定。”铎丝说，“不过我未能跟你一起到穹顶上去的后果，说不定比实际情况更糟，夫铭一定会很生我的气。”
“那我们就别告诉他。”谢顿说，“结局还算圆满。”
“我们必须告诉他。”铎丝绷着脸说，“事情可能尚末结束。”
Chapter 30

That evening Jenarr Leggen came to visit. It was after dinner and he looked from Dors to Seldon several times, as though wondering what to say. Neither offered to help him, but both waited patiently.
He had not impressed either of them as being a master of small talk.
Finally he said to Seldon, "Ive come to see how you are."
"Perfectly well," said Seldon, "except that Im a little sleepy. Dr. Venabili tells me that the treatment will keep me tired for a few days, presumably so Im sure of getting needed rest." He smiled. "Frankly, I dont mind."
Leggen breathed in deeply, let it out, hesitated, and then, almost as though he was forcing the words out of himself, said, "I wont keep you long. I perfectly understand you need to rest. I do want to say, though, that I am sorry it all happened. I should not have assumed--so casually--that you had gone down by yourself. Since you were a tyro, I should have felt more responsible for you. After all, I had agreed to let you come up. I hope you can find it in your heart to ... forgive me. Thats really all I wish to say."
Seldon yawned, putting his hand over his mouth. "Pardon me.--Since it seems to have turned out well, there need be no hard feelings. In some ways, it was not your fault. I should not have wandered away and, besides, what happened was--"
Dors interrupted. "Now, Hari, please, no conversation. Just relax. Now, I want to talk to Dr. Leggen just a bit before he goes. In the first place, Dr. Leggen, I quite understand you are concerned about how repercussions from this affair will affect you. I told you there would be no follow-up if Dr. Seldon recovered without ill effects. That seems to be taking place, so you may relax--for now. I would like to ask you about something else and I hope that this time I will have your free cooperation."
"I will try, Dr. Venabili," said Leggen stiffly.
"Did anything unusual happen during your stay Upperside?"
"You know it did. I lost Dr. Seldon, something for which I have just apologized."
"Obviously Im not referring to that. Did anything else unusual happen?"
"No, nothing. Nothing at all."
Dors looked at Seldon and Seldon frowned. It seemed to him that Dors was trying to check on his story and get an independent account. Did she think he was imagining the search vessel? He would have liked to object heatedly, but she had raised a quieting hand at him, as though she was preventing that very eventuality. He subsided, partly because of this and partly because he really wanted to sleep. He hoped that Leggen would not stay long.
"Are you certain?" said Dors. "Were there no intrusions from outside?"
"No, of course not. Oh--"
"Yes, Dr. Leggen?"
"There was a jet-down."
"Did that strike you as peculiar?"
"No, of course not."
"Why not?"
"This sounds very much as though Im being cross-examined, Dr. Venabili. I dont much like it."
"I can appreciate that, Dr. Leggen, but these questions have something to do with Dr. Seldons misadventure. It may be that this whole affair is more complicated than I had thought."
"In what way?" A new edge entered his voice. "Do you intend to raise new questions, requiring new apologies? In that case, I may find it necessary to withdraw."
"Not, perhaps, before you explain how it is you do not find a hovering jet-down a bit peculiar."
"Because, my dear woman, a number of meteorological stations on Trantor possess jet-downs for the direct study of clouds and the upper atmosphere. Our own meteorological station does not."
"Why not? It would be useful."
"Of course. But were not competing and were not keeping secrets. We will report on our findings; they will report on theirs. It makes sense, therefore, to have a scattering of differences and specializations. It would be foolish to duplicate efforts completely. The money and manpower we might spend on jet-downs can be spent on mesonic refractometers, while others will spend on the first and save on the latter. After all, there may be a great deal of competitiveness and ill feeling among the sectors, but science is one thing--only thing--that holds us together. You know that, I presume," he added ironically.
"I do, but isnt it rather coincidental that someone should be sending a jet-down right to your station on the very day you were going to use the station?"
"No coincidence at all. We announced that we were going to make measurements on that day and, consequently, some other station thought, very properly, that they might make simultaneous nephelometric measurements--clouds, you know. The results, taken together, would make more sense and be more useful than either taken separately."
Seldon said suddenly in a rather blurred voice, "They were just measuring, then?" He yawned again.
"Yes" said Leggen. "What else would they possibly be doing?"
Dors blinked her eyes, as she sometimes did when she was trying to think rapidly. "That all makes sense. To which station did this particular jet-down belong?"
Leggen shook his head. "Dr. Venabili, how can you possibly expect me to tell?"
"I thought that each meteorological jet-down might possibly have its stations markings on it."
"Surely, but I wasnt looking up and studying it, you know. I had my own work to do and I let them do theirs. When they report, Ill know whose jet-down it was."
"What if they dont report?"
"Then I would suppose their instruments failed. That happens sometimes." His right fist was clenched. "Is that all, then?"
"Wait a moment. Where do you suppose the jet-down might have come from?"
"It might be any station with jet-downs. On a days notice--and they got more than that--one of those vessels can reach us handily from anyplace on the planet."
"But who most likely?"
"Hard to say: Hestelonia, Wye, Ziggoreth, North Damiano. Id say one of these four was the most likely, but it might be any of forty others at least."
"Just one more question, then. Just one. Dr. Leggen, when you announced that your group would be Upperside, did you by any chance say that a mathematician, Dr. Hari Seldon, would be with you."
A look of apparently deep and honest surprise crossed Leggens face, a look that quickly turned contemptuous. "Why should I list names? Of what interest would that be to anyone?"
"Very well," said Dors. "The truth of the matter, then, is that Dr. Seldon saw the jet-down and it disturbed him. I am not certain why and apparently his memory is a bit fuzzy on the matter. He more or less ran away from the jet-down, got himself lost, didnt think of trying to return--or didnt dare to--till it was well into twilight, and didnt quite make it back in the dark. You cant be blamed for that, so lets forget the whole incident on both sides.
"Agreed," said Leggen. "Good-bye!" He turned on his heel and left.
When he was gone, Dors rose, pulled off Seldons slippers gently, straightened him in his bed, and covered him. He was sleeping, of course.
Then she sat down and thought. How much of what Leggen had said was true and what might possibly exist under the cover of his words?
She did not know.
Mycogen
MYCOGEN-- ... A sector of ancient Trantor buried in the past of its own legends. Mycogen made little impact on the planet. Self-satisfied and self-separated to a degree ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第三十章
　　当天傍晚，晚餐时间过后，杰纳尔•里根前来拜访。他轮流望向铎丝与谢顿，仿佛不知该如何启口。两人并未主动帮他，只是耐心地等着。在他们看来，他从来就不是个善于闲聊的人。
最后，他终于对谢顿说：“我来看看你的情况。”
“好极了，”谢顿说，“只不过有点困。凡纳比里博士告诉我，疗法会让我这几天都感到疲倦，想必是要确定我能得到应有的休息。”他微微一笑，“坦白说，我并不在乎。”
里根做了一次完整的深呼吸，迟疑了一下，然后，几乎像是将要说的话勉强挤出来一样：“我不会打扰你太久，我绝对了解你需要休息。不过，我的确想要告诉你，我对发生的一切感到很抱歉，我当初不该假设——那么随便就假设你已经自行离开。既然你是个新手，我就该感到对你有更重的责任。毕竟，是我同意让你上去的。我希望你能真心地……原谅我。我想要说的真的就是这些。”
谢顿用手遮住嘴巴，打了一个哈欠。“对不起——既然似乎是喜剧收场，你就没有必要自责。就某个角度而言，这并不是你的错。我不该逛到别处去，况且，真正的情况……”
铎丝打岔道：“好啦，哈里，拜托，别再讲了，好好休息吧。现在，趁里根博士还没走，我要跟他说几句话。首先，里根博士，我相当了解，你很担心这次事件对你可能产生的影响。我曾经说过，假如谢顿博土能够康复，没有任何的后遗症，我们就不会再追究：目前看来似乎就是如此，所以你可以宽心——暂且宽心。我想要问你另一件事，希望这次我能得到你的主动合作？”
“我尽力而为，凡纳比里博士。”里根口气僵硬地说。
“你们在穹顶上时，有没有发生任何不寻常的事？”
“你知道当然有，我把谢顿博上弄丢了，刚才我特别为这件事郑重道歉。”
“我当然不是指这件事，还有没有其他不寻常的事情发生？”
“没有了，什么事也没有。”
铎丝看了看谢顿，谢顿不禁皱起眉头。他感到铎丝在试图取得一组独立的口供，以便查证他的叙述是否属实。难道她认为搜索飞机是他的幻想吗？他本想提出强烈抗议，但她早已举起一只于，示意他保持沉默，像是为了要防止他插嘴。他果然平静下来，一部分是由于她的手势，此外也因为他浓厚的睡意。现在他只希望里根不会待得太久。
“你确定吗？”铎丝说，“没有外人闯进来？”
“没有，当然没有。喔……”
“怎么样。里根博士？”
“有一架喷射直升机。”
“你感到这点很不寻常吗？”
“不会，当然不会。”
“为什么不会？”
“这听来非常像是我在接受盘问，凡纳比里博士，我不太喜欢这样。”
“这点我能体会，里根博士，可是这些问题和谢顿博士的不幸遭遇有关。有可能整个事件比我当初想象的还要复杂。”
“怎么说？”他的声音重新变得尖刻，“你打算提出新的问题，好让我再度道歉？这样的话，我觉得或许有必要告辞了。”
“在你解释清楚之前，或许还不该走。为什么一架在上空盘旋的喷射直升机，一点都不令你觉得不寻常？”
“因为，亲爱的女士，川陀上的许多气象站都拥有喷射直升机，以便对云层和高层大气进行直接研究。不过我们的气象站并没有。”
“为什么没有？它应该很有用。”
“当然。但我们不是在相互竞争，彼此间也从不保密。我们会发表我们的研究结果，他们也会发表他们的。因此。将研究的题目和专长分散，是一种很合理的做法。假如两组人员从事完全相同的工作，那将是一件很蠢的事。我们本来可能花在喷射直升机上的财力、物力，可以拿来用在介子折射计上，别人则可省下对后者的投资，而集中于前者的计划。毕竟，虽然各区之间或许存在很多竞争和芥蒂，但科学却是一个——唯一的一个将我们凝聚起来的力量。我想这点你应该知道。”他以讥讽的口吻补上最后一句。
“我知道。可是在你要去使用气象站的那天，刚好有人派一架喷射直升机到你们上空，这会不会太巧了些？”
“根本不是什么巧合。我们曾经事先宣布要在当天进行测量，因此，其他一些气象站便会理所当然想到，他们可以同时做些悬浮物测量——就是测量云量，你知道吧。把我们的结果放在一起，会比两者分别测量的结果更有意义、更有用处。”
谢顿突然以相当含糊的声音说：“那么，他们只是在进行测量？”说完他又打了一个哈欠。
“没错。”里根说，“他们还有可能做什么别的吗？”
铎丝眨了眨眼，这是她进行快速思考时常有的小动作。“这些听来都很有道理。那架喷射直升机属于哪个气象站？”
里根摇了摇头：“凡纳比里博士，你怎能期望我会知道呢？”
“我想每架气象飞机上面，都可能挂有所属气象站的标志。”
“当然，但我并未抬头仔细研究。你知道吧，我有我自己的工作，我让他们忙他们的。当他们发表结果时，我就会知道它是谁的喷射直升机。”
“要是他们没发表呢？”
“那我就会推想，是他们的仪器失灵了，有时会出现这种情形。”他的右手紧握成拳，“好，问完了吗？”
“等一下，根据你的推测，那架喷射直升机可能是从哪里来的？”
“可能来自任何一个拥有喷射直升机的气象站。只要提早一天通知，任何一架都能从本星任何角落从容飞来——何况他们早就知道。”
“可是哪里最有可能呢？”
“很难说。海斯特娄尼亚、卫荷、齐勾瑞斯、北达米亚诺，我说这四个区可能性最大，但是至少还有其他四十个区都有可能。”
“那么，只剩最后一个问题，最后一个。里根博士，当你宣布你的小组将前往穹顶上时，你有没有可能提到了一名数学家，哈里•谢顿博士，也将跟你同行？”
里根脸上明显掠过一阵深沉而真实的惊讶，但这个表情很快转变为不屑。“我为什么要列出名字？谁会对它有兴趣？”
“很好。”铎丝说，“那么，实情是这样的。谢顿博士看见了一架喷射直升机，使他感到心神不宁。我不确定原因是什么，显然对于这件事情，他的记忆有点模糊。可以说他是为躲避那架喷射直升机才述了路。在黄昏将尽之前，他没想要试图折返，或者是不敢那么做；而后来在黑暗中，他未能找到完全正确的归路。这件事不该责怪你，所以让我们双方把这整件事忘掉吧。同意吗？”
“同意，”里根说，“再见！”说完便转身离去。
当他离去后，铎丝站起来，轻轻将谢顿的拖鞋脱掉，再让他在床上躺直，替他盖好被子。当然，他早就睡着了。
然后她坐下来开始寻思。里根刚才说的有多少是实情，他的话中可能隐藏着什么，她一概不知。
Chapter 31

When Seldon woke, he found a new face looking at him solemnly. For a moment he frowned owlishly and then he said, "Hummin?"
Hummin smiled very slightly. "You remember me, then?"
"It was only for a day, nearly two months ago, but I remember. You were not arrested, then, or in any way--"
"As you see, I am here, quite safe and whole, but--and he glanced at Dors, who stood to one side--"it was not very easy for me to come here."
Seldon said, "Im glad to see you.--Do you mind, by the way?" He jerked his thumb in the direction of the bathroom.
Hummin said, "Take your time. Have breakfast."
Hummin didnt join him at breakfast. Neither did Dors. Nor did they speak. Hummin scanned a book-film with an attitude of easy absorption. Dors inspected her nails critically and then, taking out a microcomputer, began making notes with a stylus.
Seldon watched them thoughtfully and did not try to start a conversation. The silence now might be in response to some Trantorian reserve customary at a sickbed. To be sure, he now felt perfectly normal, but perhaps they did not realize that. It was only when he was done with his last morsel and with the final drop of milk (which he was obviously getting used to, for it no longer tasted odd) that Hummin spoke.
He said, "How are you, Seldon?"
"Perfectly well, Hummin. Sufficiently well, certainly, for me to be up and about."
"Im glad to hear it," said Hummin dryly. "Dors Venabili was much to blame in allowing this to happen."
Seldon frowned. "No. I insisted on going Upperside."
"Im sure, but she should, at all costs, have gone with you."
"I told her I didnt want her to go with me."
Dors said, "Thats not so, Hari. Dont defend me with gallant lies."
Seldon said angrily, "But dont forget that Dors also came Upperside after me, against strong resistance, and undoubtedly saved my life. Thats not bending the truth at all. Have you added that to your evaluation, Hummin?"
Dors interrupted again, obviously embarrassed. "Please, Hari. Chetter Hummin is perfectly correct in feeling that I should either have kept you from going Upperside or have gone up with you. As for my subsequent actions, he has praised them."
"Nevertheless," said Hummin, "that is past and we can let it go. Let us talk about what happened Upperside, Seldon."
Seldon looked about and said guardedly, "Is it safe to do so?"
Hummin smiled slightly. "Dors has placed this room in a Distortion Field. I can be pretty sure that no Imperial agent at the University--if there is one--has the expense to penetrate it. You are a suspicious person, Seldon."
"Not by nature," said Seldon. "Listening to you in the park and afterward-- You are a persuasive person, Hummin. By the time you were through, I was ready to fear that Eto Demerzel was lurking in every shadow."
"I sometimes think he might be," said Hummin gravely.
"If he was," said Seldon, "I wouldnt know it was he. What does he look like?"
"That scarcely matters. You wouldnt see him unless he wanted you to and by then it would all be over, I imagine--which is what we must prevent. Lets talk about that jet-down you saw."
Seldon said, "As I told you, Hummin, you filled me with fears of Demerzel. As soon as I saw the jet-down, I assumed he was after me, that I had foolishly stepped outside the protection of Streeling University by going Upperside, that I had been lured up there for the specific purpose of being picked up without difficulty."
Dors said, "On the other hand, Leggen--"
Seldon said quickly, "Was he here last night?"
"Yes, dont you remember?"
"Vaguely. I was dead tired. Its all a blur in my memory."
"Well, when he was here last night, Leggen said that the jet-down was merely a meteorological vessel from another station. Perfectly ordinary. Perfectly harmless."
"What?" Seldon was taken aback. "I dont believe that."
Hummin said, "Now the question is: Why dont you believe that? Was there anything about the jet-down that made you think it was dangerous? Something specific, that is, and not just a pervasive suspicion placed in your head by me."
Seldon thought back, biting his lower lip. He said, "Its actions. It seemed to push its forepart below the cloud deck, as though it were looking for something, then it would appear in another spot just the same way, then in another spot, and so on. It seemed to be searching Upperside methodically, section by section, and homing in on me."
Hummin said, "Perhaps you were personifying, Seldon. You may have been treating the jet-down as though it was a strange animal looking for you. It wasnt, of course. It was simply a jet-down and if it was a meteorological vessel, its actions were perfectly normal ... and harmless."
Seldon said, "It didnt seem that way to me."
Hummin said, "Im sure it didnt, but we dont actually know anything. Your conviction that you were in danger is simply an assumption. Leggens decision that it was a meteorological vessel is also only an assumption."
Seldon said stubbornly, "I cant believe that it was an entirely innocent event."
"Well then," said Hummin, "suppose we assume the worst--that the vessel was looking for you. How would whoever sent that vessel know you would be there to seek?"
Dors interjected, "I asked Dr. Leggen if he had, in his report of the forthcoming meteorological work, included the information that Hari would be with the group. There was no reason he should in the ordinary course of events and he denied that he had, with considerable surprise at the question. I believed him."
Hummin said thoughtfully, "Dont believe him too readily. Wouldnt he deny it, in any case? Now ask yourself why he allowed Seldon to come along in the first place. We know he objected initially, but he did relent, without much fight. And that, to me, seems rather out of character for Leggen."
Dors frowned and said, "I suppose that does make it a bit more likely that he did arrange the entire affair. Perhaps he permitted Haris company only in order to put him in the position of being taken. He might have received orders to that effect. We might further argue that he encouraged his young intern, Clowzia, to engage Haris attention and draw him away from the group, isolating him. That would account for Leggens odd lack of concern over Haris absence when it came time to go below. He would insist that Hari had left earlier, something he would have laid the groundwork for, since he had carefully showed him how to go down by himself. It would also account for his reluctance to go back up in search of him, since he would not want to waste time looking for someone he assumed would not be found."
Hummin, who had listened carefully, said, "You make an interesting case against him, but lets not accept that too readily either. After all, he did come Upperside with you in the end."
"Because footsteps had been detected. The Chief Seismologist had [been] witness to that."
"Well, did Leggen show shock and surprise when Seldon was found? I mean, beyond that of finding someone who had been brought into extreme peril through Leggens own negligence. Did he act as though Seldon wasnt supposed to be there? Did he behave as though he were asking himself: How is it they didnt pick him up?"
Dors thought carefully, then said, "He was obviously shocked by the sight of Hari lying there, but I couldnt possibly tell if there was anything to his feelings beyond the very natural horror of the situation."
"No, I suppose you couldnt."
But now Seldon, who had been looking from one to the other as they spoke and who had been listening intently, said, "I dont think it was Leggen."
Hummin transferred his attention to Seldon. "Why do you say that?"
"For one thing, as you noted, he was clearly unwilling to have me come along. It took a whole day of argument and I think he agreed only because he had the impression that I was a clever mathematician who could help him out with meteorological theory. I was anxious to go up there and, if he had been under orders to see to it that I was taken Upperside, there would have been no need to be so reluctant about it."
"Is it reasonable to suppose he wanted you only for your mathematics? Did he discuss the mathematics with you? Did he make an attempt to explain his theory to you?"
"No," said Seldon, "he didnt. He did say something about going into it later on, though. The trouble was, he was totally involved with his instruments. I gathered he had expected sunshine that hadnt showed up and he was counting on his instruments having been at fault, but they were apparently working perfectly, which frustrated him. I think this was an unexpected development that both soured his temper and turned his attention away from me. As for Clowzia, the young woman who preoccupied me for a few minutes, I do not get the feeling, as I look back on it, that she deliberately led me away from the scene. The initiative was mine. I was curious about the vegetation on Upperside and it was I who drew her away, rather than vice versa. Far from Leggen encouraging her action, he called her back while I was still in sight and I moved farther away and out of sight entirely on my own."
"And yet," said Hummin, who seemed intent on objecting to every suggestion that was made, "if that ship was looking for you, those on board must have known youd be there. How would they know--if not from Leggett?"
"The man I suspect," said Seldon, "is a young psychologist named Lisung Randa"
"Randa?" said Dors. "I cant believe that. I know him. He simply would not be working for the Emperor. Hes anti-Imperialist to the core."
"He might pretend to be," said Seldon. "In fact, he would have to be openly, violently, and extremely anti-Imperialist if he was trying to mask the fact that he is an Imperial agent."
"But thats exactly what hes not like," said Dors. "He is not violent and extreme in anything. Hes quiet and good-natured and his views are always expressed mildly, almost timidly. Im convinced theyre genuine."
"And yet, Dors," said Seldon earnestly, "it was he who first told me of the meteorological project, it was he who urged me to go Upperside, and it was he who persuaded Leggen to allow me to join him, rather exaggerating my mathematical prowess in the process. One must wonder why he was so anxious to get me up there, why he should labor so hard."
"For your good, perhaps. He was interested in you, Hari, and must have thought that meteorology might have been useful in psychohistory. Isnt that possible?"
Hummin said quietly, "Lets consider another point. There was a considerable lapse of time between the moment when Randa told you about the meteorology project and the moment you actually went Upperside. If Randa is innocent of anything underhanded, he would have no particular reason to keep quiet about it. If he is a friendly and gregarious person--"
"He is," said Dors.
"--then he might very likely tell a number of friends about it. In that case, we couldnt really tell who the informer might be. In fact, just to make another point, suppose Randa is anti-Imperialist. That would not necessarily mean he is not an agent. We would have to ask: Whom is he an agent for? On whose behalf does he work?"
Seldon was astonished. "Who else is there to work for but the Empire? Who else but Demerzel?"
Hummin raised his hand. "You are far from understanding the whole complexity of Trantorian politics, Seldon." He turned toward Dors. "Tell me again: Which were the four sectors that Dr. Leggen named as likely sources for a meteorological vessel?"
"Hestelonia, Wye, Ziggoreth, and North Damiano."
"And you did not ask the question in any leading way? You didnt ask if a particular sector might be the source?"
"No, definitely not. I simply asked if he could speculate as to the source of the jet-down."
"And you"--Hummin turned to Seldon "may perhaps have seen some marking, some insigne, on the jet-down?"
Seldon wanted to retort heatedly that the vessel could hardly be seen through the clouds, that it emerged only briefly, that he himself was not looking for markings, but only for escape--but he held back. Surely, Hummin knew all that. Instead, he said simply, "Im afraid not."
Dors said, "If the jet-down was on a kidnapping mission, might not the insigne have been masked?"
"That is the rational assumption," said Hummin, "and it tray well have been, but in this Galaxy rationality does not always triumph. However, since Seldon seems to have taken no note of any details concerning the vessel, we can only speculate. What Im thinking is: Wye."
"Why?" echoed Seldon. "I presume they wanted to take me because whoever was on the ship wanted me for my knowledge of psychohistory."
"No, no." Hummin lifted his right forefinger as if lecturing a young student. "W-y-e. It is the name of a sector on Trantor. A very special sector. It has been ruled by a line of Mayors for some three thousand years. It has been a continuous line, a single dynasty. There was a time, some five-hundred years ago, when two Emperors and an Empress of the House of Wye sat on the Imperial throne. It was a comparatively short period and none of the Wye rulers were particularly distinguished or successful, but the Mayors of Wye have never forgotten this Imperial past.
"They have not been actively disloyal to the ruling houses that have succeeded them, but neither have they been known to volunteer much on behalf of those houses. During the occasional periods of civil war, they maintained a kind of neutrality, making moves that seemed best calculated to prolong the civil war and make it seem necessary to turn to Wye as a compromise solution. That never worked out, but they never stopped trying either.
"The present Mayor of Wye is particularly capable. He is old now, but his ambition hasnt cooled. If anything happens to Cleon--even a natural death--the Mayor will have a chance at the succession over Cleons own too-young son. The Galactic public will always be a little more partial toward a claimant with an Imperial past.
"Therefore, if the Mayor of Wye has heard of you, you might serve as a useful scientific prophet on behalf of his house. There would be a traditional motive for Wye to try to arrange some convenient end for Cleon, use you to predict the inevitable succession of Wye and the coming of peace and prosperity for a thousand years after. Of course, once the Mayor of Wye is on the throne and has no further use for you, you might well follow Cleon to the grave."
Seldon broke the grim silence that followed by saying, "But we dont know that it is this Mayor of Wye who is after me."
"No, we dont. Or that anyone at all is after you, at the moment. The jet-down might, after all, have been an ordinary meteorological testing vessel as Leggen has suggested. Still, as the news concerning psychohistory and its potential spreads--and it surely must--more and more of the powerful and semi-powerful on Trantor or, for that matter, elsewhere will want to make use of your services."
"What, then," said Dors, "shall we do?"
"That is the question, indeed." Hummin ruminated for a while, then said, "Perhaps it was a mistake to come here. For a professor, it is all too likely that the hiding place chosen would be a University. Streeling is one of many, but it is among the largest and most free, so it wouldnt be long before tendrils from here and there would begin feeling their soft, blind way toward this place. I think that as soon as possible--today, perhaps--Seldon should be moved to another and better hiding place. But--"
"But?" said Seldon.
"But I dont know where."
Seldon said, "Call up a gazeteer on the computer screen and choose a place at random."
"Certainly not," said Hummin. "If we do that, we are as likely to find a place that is less secure than average, as one that is more secure. No, this must be reasoned out.--Somehow."
第三十一章
第七部 麦曲生
麦曲生：……古川陀的一区……麦曲生埋葬在自己的传说中，对整个行星几乎没有任何影响。高度的自满与自我隔离……
——《银河百科全书》


第三十一章
当谢顿醒来时，发现另有一张严肃的面孔正望着他，不觉皱紧眉头凝视了好一会儿：“夫铭？”
夫铭露出极浅的笑容：“这么说，你还记得我。”
“总共只有一天时间……将近两个月之前，不过我还是记得。这么说，你并没被捕，或是有任何……”
“你看得出来，我人在这里，相当安全，毫发无损。可是——”他瞥了一眼站在一旁的铎丝，“我来这里一趟不怎么容易。”
谢顿说：“我很高兴见到你——对了，你是否介意？”他用拇指朝浴室的方向指了指。
夫铭说：“慢慢来，吃顿早餐再说。”
夫铭没有跟他一起吃早餐，铎丝也没有，但他们两人并未交淡。夫铭利用时间扫描一本胶卷书，看得律津有味。铎丝先是细心检视她的指甲，然后取出一台微电脑，用一枝铁笔始做起笔记。
谢顿若有所思地望着他们两人，并未试图主动展开交谈。现在这个肃静的气氛，或许正反映出川陀人在病床前的噤声习俗。事实上，他觉得自己已经完全恢复正常，可是他们或许还不了解这点。
等到他吃完最后一口食物，喝完最后一滴牛奶（他显然已逐渐习惯，因为喝起来已经没有怪味）的时候，夫铭才终于开门。
他说：“你好吗，谢顿？”
“好极了，夫铭。至少，绝对好得可以下床走走。”
“我很高兴听到这句话。”夫铭以平板的门气说，“铎丝•凡纳比里竟然让这种事发生，实在该好好责备一番。”
谢顿皱起眉头：“不，是我坚持要到穹顶上去的。”
“我确定是这样，可是她应该跟你一起去，不计任何代价。”
“我告诉她，我不要她跟我一起去。”
铎丝说：“不是这样的，哈里，不要那么好心说谎替我辩护。”
谢顿生气了：“可是别忘了，铎丝也曾克服强大的阻力，赶到穹顶上去找我，而且无疑是她救了我的命。这些话丝毫没有扭曲事实，你下结论前考虑过这点吗，夫铭？”
钎丝显然感到很尴尬再度打岔：“拜托，哈里。契特•夫铭的想法完全正确，我若是不阻止你前往穹顶上，就该跟你一起上去。至于我后来的那些行动，夫铭已经嘉许过了。”
“不管如何，”夫铭说，“这事已成过去，我们可以把它忘了。让我们谈谈在穹顶上发生了什么事，谢顿。”
谢顿环顾四周，然后小心翼翼地问道：“在这里讨论安全吗？”
夫铭微微一笑：“铎丝已将这个房间置于畸变电磁场中，我可以相当确定，这所大学里的任何帝国特务——如果真有的话——都没本事能穿透它。你是个多疑的人，谢顿。”
“不是天生的，”谢顿说，“而是因为你在公园以及后来对我说的那些话。你是个很有说服力的人，夫铭。当你讲完之后，我就开始害怕伊图•丹莫茨尔隐藏在某个阴暗的角落。”
“我有时认为真有可能。”夫铭以严肃的口吻说。
“即使他那样做，”谢顿说，“我也不会知道那就是他。他长得什么样子？”
“那不重要。你根本见不到他，除非他要让你看见，不过我猜到那时就一切都完了——这正是我们必须防范的。让我们谈谈你见到的那架喷射直升机。”
谢顿说：“正如我所说的，夫铭，你让我心中充满对丹莫茨尔的恐惧。我一看到那架喷射直升机，就猜是他追来了；而我糊里糊涂地跑到穹顶上，脱离了川陀大学的保护范围；还有，我是被引诱到那里去的，目的就是想要毫无困难地将我抓走。”
铎丝说：“另一方面，里根——”
谢顿立刻说：“他昨晚来过这里。”
“是的，你不记得了？”
“很模糊。当时我累得要死，记忆十分恍惚。”
“嗯，昨晚在这里时，里根说那架喷射直升机只是另一个气象站派来的气象飞机。完全普通，完全无害。”
“什么？”谢顿吃了一惊，“我不相信。”
夫铭说：“现在的问题是，你为什么不相信？那架喷射直升机是否有任何不对劲，使你想到它会带来危险？也就是说，它有什么特殊之处？这与我在你脑子里灌输的疑心无关。”
谢顿咬着下唇，回想了一下：“它的动作。它似乎将尖端推向云盖之下，好像在寻找什么东西；接着它又在另一个位置出现，重复同样的动作；然后又换到下一个位置，如此周而复始。它似乎是在有规律地搜寻着穹顶上，一块接着一块，而目标就是我。”
夫铭说：“也许你把它拟人化了，谢顿。你可能把那架喷射直升机当成一头正在追捕你的怪兽，它当然不是。它只小过是一架喷射直升机，如果它的确是气象飞机，它的行动就完全正常……而且无害。”
谢顿说：“我当时觉得并非如此。”
夫铭说：“我确信你有那种感觉，但我们实际上什么也不知道。你深信自己当时身陷险境，那不过是一种假设；里根判断它是一架气象飞机，也只是另一种假设罢了。”
谢顿顽固地说：“我无法相信这是一件完全单纯的事件。”
“好吧，那么，”夫铭说，“就让我们假设最糟的情况——那架飞机的确是来找你的。不论是谁派它来的，他怎么知道在那里找得到你？”
铎丝突然插嘴：“我问过里根博士，在他宣布这次气象工作的报告中，有没有提到哈里会跟那个小组一起上去。照常理来说，他没有理由那样做，而他也否认了这点。他对这个问题还十分惊讶，我相信他的话。”
夫铭语重心长地说：“别太容易相信他。无论如何，他随时都可以否认。现在问问你自己，他当初为何要准许谢顿与他同行。我们知道他原本反对，不过并未经过什么激辩，他的态度很快软化。在我的感觉中，那似乎不太像里根的个性。”
铎丝皱了皱眉头：“听你这么说，的确让人觉得整个事件很可能是他的阴谋。或许他允许哈里同行，只是为了使他成为容易得于的猎物——他可能是奉命行事的。我们还可以进一步推论，是他鼓励他的年轻见习生——克劳吉雅，去吸引哈里的注意，引他远离众人，将他孤立起来。这就能解释他们将要下来时，里根对哈里的失踪为何毫不关心。他会坚持哈里早已离去，这件事本来就是他安排的，因为他已经仔细告诉哈里，教他如何自己搭升降机下来。这也能解释他为何不愿再回来找他，因为他不想浪费时间，去寻找一个他认为根本找不到的人。”
一直在细心倾听的夫铭，此时说道：“你对他做出一个很有意思的指控，但我们也别太轻易就接受这点。毕竟，最后他的确跟你到穹顶上去了。”
“因为我们侦测到脚步，首席地震学家是见证人。”
“嗯，谢顿被发现时，里根是否显得很震惊、讶异？我是指，除了发觉由于他自己的疏忽，而将某人置于险境之外的反应。里根是否表现得像是谢顿不该还在那里？是否显得好像在问自己：他们怎么没把他抓走？”
铎丝仔细想了一下，然后说：“他看到谢顿躺在那里，显然十分震惊。但我无法判断在他的感觉中，是否有任何超过对当时情况的合理反应。”
“嗯，我也认为你办不到。”
当两人说话时，谢顿轮流望着他们，而且，一直专心倾听着：突然他插嘴道：“我认为不是里根。”
犬铭将注意力转移到谢顿身上：“你为什么这样说？”
“理由之一，正如你提到的，最初他显然不愿让我同行。我们争论了一整天，我想他最后之所以同意，只是因为在他的印象中，我是个聪明的数学家，能对他的气象理论有所帮助。我十分渴望到上面去，假使他奉命务必将我带到穹顶上，没有必要表现得如此勉强。”
“他接受你只是为了你的数学，这假没是否合理？他有没有跟你讨论过数学？有没有试图向你解释他的理论？”
“没有，”谢顿说，“他没有。不过，他的确说过等一下再讨论之类的话。然而问题是，后来他将全部心思放在那些仪器上。我猜他预期该有阳光，结果阳光并末出现，他判断是他的仪器出了毛病。可是它们的运作显然完全正常，这使他觉得很沮丧。我想这是个意料之外的发展，它不但惹怒了他，也计他的注意力从我身上移开。至于克劳吉雅，那个曾吸引我几分钟注意的年轻女子，在我回顾当时的情景时，并未感到她曾故意将我引开原地。采取主动的是我，我对穹顶上的植物产生了好奇心，是我将她带走的，并非刚好相反。里根非但没有鼓励她那么做，而且在他们还看得见我的时候，他就把她叫了回去。后来完全是我自己越走越远，最后从他们的视线中消失。”
“然而，”夫铭似乎打定主意反对每项说明，“假如那架飞机是来找你的，机上人员必定知道你会在那里。假如情报并非来自里根，他们又怎么会知道？”
“我怀疑的人，”谢顿说，“是一位名叫李松•阮达的年轻心理学家。”
“阮达？”铎丝说，“不可能。我了解这个人，他绝不会为皇上工作，他是彻头彻尾的反帝人士。”
“他可能是装的。”谢顿说，“事实上，如果他想掩饰自己是个帝国特务的事实，就必须公开地、强烈地、甚至偏激地表现出反帝主张。”
“但他正好不像那样。”铎丝说，“他一点也不强烈、不偏激。他这个人和蔼可亲，总是以温和的——几乎是羞怯的方式表达自己的观点，我确信这些绝对不是出于伪装。”
“然而，铎丝，”谢顿一本正经地说，“一开始是他告诉我那个气象计划，是他力劝我到穹顶上去，是他说服里根准我加入，其间还特别夸大我的数学功力。这就令人不得不怀疑，他为何那么渴望让我上那儿去，为何如此尽心尽力。”
“或许是为你好吧。他对你有好感，哈里，他一定是认为气象学可能对心理史学有所帮助。这难道不可能吗？”
夫铭以平静的口吻说：“让我们来考虑另一个可能性。在阮达告诉你那个气象计划之后，和你真正前往穹顶上之前，这期间有好长一段时间。假如阮达和任何秘密活动毫无牵连，他就没有特别理由对这件事保密。假使他是个友善外向、喜爱社交的人——”
“他就是这样。”铎丝说。
“——那么，他很可能对许多朋友提到这件事。要是这样的话，我们根本无法判断告密者是谁。事实上——我只是提出另一个可能性——就算阮达真是个反帝人士，也不一定代表他绝不是特务。我们必须考虑的是：他是谁的特务？他替什么人工作？”
谢顿很惊讶：“还能替谁工作呢，除了帝国之外？除了丹莫茨尔之外？”
夫铭举起一只手来：“你对整个川陀政治的复杂性一点都不了解，谢顿。”他又转向铎丝说：“再告诉我一遍：里根博士认为那架气象飞机最可能来自哪四个区域？”
“海斯特娄尼亚、卫荷、齐勾瑞斯，以及北达米亚诺。”
“你没诱导他回答吧？你有主动提到某区是否有可能吗？”
“没有，绝对没有。我只是问他能不能推测那架喷射直升机来自何方。”
“而你——”夫铭转向谢顿，“或许看到了那架喷射直升机上有某些标志，某种徽章？”
谢顿本想极力反驳，说由于云层的遮掩，他几乎看不见那架飞机，说它只是偶尔短暂现身，说他自己并未寻找什么标志，而只想到逃命——不过他都忍住了。不用说，这些夫铭全部知道。
反之，他只是简单答道：“只怕没有。”
铎丝说：“假如那架喷射直升机负有绑架任务，难道不会将徽章遮起来吗？”
“这是个理性的假设，”夫铭说，“而且很有可能真是这样，不过在这个银河中，理性不一定总是胜利者。无论如何，既然谢顿似乎未曾注意那架飞机的任何细节，我们如今只能做些推测。而我想到的是——卫荷。”
“为何？”谢顿重复那两个音，“不论飞机上是些什么人，我猜他们想要抓我的原因，是为了我拥有的心理史学知识。”
“不，不。”夫铭举起右手食指，像是在教训一个年轻学生。“保卫的卫，电荷的荷，它是川陀一个区的名字。这是个很特别的区，过去大约三千年来，一直被一个世系的区长统治。那是个连续的世系，一个单一的朝代。曾有一段时问，大约五百年前，帝国有两位皇帝和一位女皇出自卫荷世族。那是一段相当短的时期，卫荷统治者都不怎么杰出，也没什么特殊的功绩，但是卫荷区长一直没忘记这段称帝的过去。
“对于后继的统治世族，他们并没有任何实际的叛逆行动，但也从来没听说他们曾经如何主动为那些世族效命。在偶尔发生内战时期，他们一律保持某种中立的立场，采取的行动似乎经过详细计算，目的在于将战事尽量延长，并让情势演变得似乎必须求助卫荷，才能获取一个折中的解决之道。这种计谋从未得逞，但他们也从未放弃尝试。
“目前的卫荷区长特别精明能干。他已经老了，可是野心尚未冷却。假如克里昂有什么三长两短，即使是自然死亡，那位区长也有机会将克里昂的亲生幼子赶走，而由自己继任皇位。对于一位具有皇室传统的逐鹿者，银河黎民总会稍有偏爱。
“因此，假如卫荷区长听说过你，便会想到或许可以善加利用，把你定位为他们那个世族宣传的科学预言家。卫荷早已有个因循已久的动机，试图以简便的手法解决克里昂，再利用你来预测卫荷是不二的继位者，如此便能带来千年的和平与繁荣。当然，一旦卫荷区长登上皇位，再也不必利用你时，你就很可能被埋葬在克里昂旁边。”
在一段阴郁的沉默之后，谢顿开口说：“可是我们并不知道，想抓我的是不是这个卫荷区长。”
“没错，我们不知道。而我们也不确定，此时此刻究竟是否有人想抓你。无论如何，那架喷射直升机仍有可能如里根所言，只是一架普通的气象试验飞机。话说回来，随着有关心理史学与其潜力的消息越传越广——这是一定的事，越来越多的川陀强权或半吊子，甚至其他世界的野心家，都会想要利用你为他们服务。”
“那么，”铎丝说，“我们该怎么办？”
“这的确是个问题。”夫铭沉思了一会儿，然后说：“也许来到这里是个错误。对一位教授而言，选择一所大学藏身实在太有可能。大学虽然为数众多，但川陀是最大、最自由的几所之一。所以要不了多久，各处的卷须就会悄悄摸索过来。我想谢顿应该尽快——或许就是今天——换到另一处较佳的藏匿地点，只是……”
“只是？”谢顿问。
“只是我也不知道该去哪里。”
谢顿说：“在计算机屏幕上叫出地名目录，然后随机选取一处。”
“当然不行。”夫铭说，“如果我们那样做，我们会有刚好一半的机会，找到一个安全值低于平均值的地方。不行，这必须客观推论出来——总有办法的。”
Chapter 32

The three remained huddled in Seldons quarters till past lunch. During that time, Hari and Dors spoke occasionally and quietly on indifferent subjects, but Hummin maintained an almost complete silence. He sat upright, ate little, and his grave countenance (which, Seldon thought, made him look older than his years) remained quiet and withdrawn.
Seldon imagined him to be reviewing the immense geography of Trantor in his mind, searching for a corner that would be ideal. Surely, it couldnt be easy. Seldons own Helicon was somewhat larger by a percent or two than Trantor was and had a smaller ocean. The Heliconian land surface was perhaps 10 percent larger than the Trantorian. But Helicon was sparsely populated, its surface only sprinkled with scattered cities; Trantor was all city. Where Helicon was divided into twenty administrative sectors; Trantor had over eight hundred and every one of those hundreds was itself a complex of subdivisions.
Finally Seldon said in some despair, "Perhaps it might be best, Hummin, to choose which candidate for my supposed abilities is most nearly benign, hand me over to that one, and count on him to defend me against the rest."
Hummin looked up and said in utmost seriousness, "That is not necessary. I know the candidate who is most nearly benign and he already has you."
Seldon smiled. "Do you place yourself on the same level with the Mayor of Wye and the Emperor of all the Galaxy?"
"In point of view of position, no. But as far as the desire to control you is concerned, I rival them. They, however, and anyone else I can think of want you in order to strengthen their own wealth and power, while I have no ambitions at all, except for the good of the Galaxy."
"I suspect," said Seldon dryly, "that each of your competitors--if asked--would insist that he too was thinking only of the good of the Galaxy."
"I am sure they would," said Hummin, "but so far, the only one of my competitors, as you call them, whom you have met is the Emperor and he was interested in having you advance fictionalized predictions that might stabilize his dynasty. I do not ask you for anything like that. I ask only that you perfect your psychohistorical technique so that mathematically valid predictions, even if only statistical in nature, can be made."
"True. So far, at least," said Seldon with a half-smile.
"Therefore, I might as well ask: How are you coming along with that task? Any progress?"
Seldon was uncertain whether to laugh or cage. After a pause, he did neither, but managed to speak calmly. "Progress? In less than two months? Hummin, this is something that might easily take me my whole life and the lives of the next dozen who follow me.--And even then end in failure."
"Im not talking about anything as final as a solution or even as hopeful as the beginning of a solution. Youve said flatly a number of times that a useful psychohistory is possible but impractical. All I am asking is whether there now seems any hope that it can be made practical."
"Frankly, no."
Dors said, "Please excuse me. I am not a mathematician, so I hope this is not a foolish question. How can you know something is both possible and impractical? Ive heard you say that, in theory, you might personally meet and greet all the people in the Empire, but that it is not a practical feat because you couldnt live long enough to do it. But how can you tell that psychohistory is something of this sort?"
Seldon looked at Dors with some incredulity. "Do you want that explained."
"Yes," she said, nodding her head vigorously so that her curled hair vibrated.
"As a matter of fact," said Hummin, "so would I."
"Without mathematics?" said Seldon with just a trace of a smile.
"Please," said Hummin.
"Well--" He retired into himself to choose a method of presentation. Then he said, "--If you want to understand some aspect of the Universe, it helps if you simplify it as much as possible and include only those properties and characteristics that are essential to understanding. If you want to determine how an object drops, you dont concern yourself with whether it is new or old, is red or green, or has an odor or not. You eliminate those things and thus do not needlessly complicate matters. The simplification you can call a model or a simulation and you can present it either as an actual representation on a computer screen or as a mathematical relationship. If you consider the primitive theory of nonrelativistic gravitation--"
Dors said at once, "You promised there would be no mathematics. Dont try to slip it in by calling it primitive. "
"No, no. I mean primitive only in that it has been known as long as our records go back, that its discovery is shrouded in the mists of antiquity as is that of fire or the wheel. In any case, the equations for such gravitational theory contain within themselves a description of the motions of a planetary system, of a double star, of tides, and of many other things. Making use of such equations, we can even set up a pictorial simulation and have a planet circling a star or two stars circling each other on a two-dimensional screen or set up more complicated systems in a three-dimensional holograph. Such simplified simulations make it far easier to grasp a phenomenon than it would be if we had to study the phenomenon itself. In fact, without the gravitational equations, our knowledge of planetary motions and of celestial mechanics generally would be sparse indeed.
"Now, as you wish to know more and more about any phenomenon or as a phenomenon becomes more complex, you need more and more elaborate equations, more and more detailed programming, and you end with a computerized simulation that is harder and harder to grasp."
"Cant you form a simulation of the simulation?" asked Hummin. "You would go down another degree."
"In that case, you would have to eliminate some characteristic of the phenomenon which you want to include and your simulation becomes useless. The LPS--that is, the least possible simulation gains in complexity faster than the object being simulated does and eventually the simulation catches up with the phenomenon. Thus, it was established thousands of years ago that the Universe as a whole, in its full complexity, cannot be represented by any simulation smaller than itself.
"In other words, you cant get any picture of the Universe as a whole except by studying the entire Universe. It has been shown also that if one attempts to substitute simulations of a small part of the Universe, then another small part, then another small part, and so on, intending to put them all together to form a total picture of the Universe, one would find that there are an infinite number of such part simulations. It would therefore take an infinite time to understand the Universe in full and that is just another way of saying that it is impossible to gain all the knowledge there is."
"I understand you so far," said Dors, sounding a little surprised.
"Well then, we know that some comparatively simple things are easy to simulate and as things grow more and more complex they become harder to simulate until finally they become impossible to simulate. But at what level of complexity does simulation cease to be possible? Well, what I have shown, making use of a mathematical technique first invented in this past century and barely usable even if one employs a large and very fast computer, our Galactic society falls short of that mark. It can be represented by a simulation simpler than itself. And I went on to show that this would result in the ability to predict future events in a statistical fashion--that is, by stating the probability for alternate sets of events, rather than flatly predicting that one set will take place."
"In that case," said Hummin, "since you can profitably simulate Galactic society, its only a matter of doing so. Why is it impractical?"
"All I have proved is that it will not take an infinite time to understand Galactic society, but if it takes a billion years it will still be impractical. That will be essentially the same as infinite time to us."
"Is that how long it would take? A billion years?"
"I havent been able to work out how long it would take, but I strongly suspect that it will take at least a billion years, which is why I suggested that number."
"But you dont really know."
"Ive been trying to work it out."
"Without success?"
"Without success."
"The University library does not help?" Hummin cast a look at Dors as he asked the question.
Seldon shook his head slowly. "Not at all."
"Dors cant help?"
Dors sighed. "I know nothing about the subject, Chetter. I can only suggest ways of looking. If Hari looks and doesnt find, I am helpless."
Hummin rose to his feet. "In that case, there is no great use in staying here at the University and I must think of somewhere else to place you."
Seldon reached out and touched his sleeve. "Still, I have an idea."
Hummin stared at him with a faint narrowing of eyes that might have belied surprise--or suspicion. "When did you get the idea? Just now?"
"No. Its been buzzing in my head for a few days before I went Upperside. That little experience eclipsed it for a while, but asking about the library reminded me of it."
Hummin seated himself again. "Tell me your idea--if its not something thats totally marinated in mathematics."
"No mathematics at all. Its just that reading history in the library reminded me that Galactic society was less complicated in the past. Twelve thousand years ago, when the Empire was on the way to being established, the Galaxy contained only about ten million inhabited worlds. Twenty thousand years ago, the pre-Imperial kingdoms included only about ten thousand worlds altogether. Still deeper in the past, who knows how society shrinks down? Perhaps even to a single world as in the legends you yourself once mentioned, Hummin."
Hummin said, "And you think you might be able to work out psychohistory if you dealt with a much simpler Galactic society?"
"Yes, it seems to me that I might be able to do so."
"Then too," said Dors with sudden enthusiasm, "suppose you work out psychohistory for a smaller society of the past and suppose you can make predictions from a study of the pre-Imperial situation as to what might happen a thousand years after the formation of the Empire--you could then check the actual situation at that time and see how near the mark you were."
Hummin said coldly, "Considering that you would know in advance the situation of the year 1,000 of the Galactic Era, it would scarcely be a fair test. You would be unconsciously swayed by your prior knowledge and you would be bound to choose values for your equation in such a way as to give you what you would know to be the solution."
"I dont think so," said Dors. "We dont know the situation in 1,000 G.E. very well and we would have to dig. After all, that was eleven millennia ago."
Seldons face turned into a picture of dismay. "What do you mean we dont know the situation in 1,000 G.E. very well? There were computers then, werent there, Dors?"
"Of course."
"And memory storage units and recordings of ear and eye? We should have all the records of 1,000 G.E. as we have of the present year of 12,020 G.E."
"In theory, yes, but in actual practice-- Well, you know, Hari, its what you keep saying. Its possible to have full records of 1,000 G.E., but its not practical to expect to have it."
"Yes, but what I keep saying, Dors, refers to mathematical demonstrations. I dont see the applications to historical records."
Dors said defensively, "Records dont last forever, Hari. Memory banks can be destroyed or defaced as a result of conflict or can simply deteriorate with time. Any memory bit, any record that is not referred to for a long time, eventually drowns in accumulated noise. They say that fully one third of the records in the Imperial Library are simply gibberish, but, of course, custom will not allow those records to be removed. Other libraries are less tradition-bound. In the Streeling University library, we discard worthless items every ten years.
"Naturally, records frequently referred to and frequently duplicated on various worlds and in various libraries--governmental and private--remain clear enough for thousands of years, so that many of the essential points of Galactic history remain known even if they took place in pre-Imperial times. However, the farther back you go, the less there is preserved."
"I cant believe that," said Seldon. "I should think that new copies would be made of any record in danger of withering. How could you let knowledge disappear?"
"Undesired knowledge is useless knowledge," said Dors. "Can you imagine all the time, effort, and energy expended in a continual refurbishing of unused data? And that wastage would grow steadily more extreme with time."
"Surely, you would have to allow for the fact that someone at some time might need the data being so carelessly disposed of."
"A particular item might be wanted once in a thousand years. To save it all just in case of such a need isnt cost-effective. Even in science. You spoke of the primitive equations of gravitation and say it is primitive because its discovery is lost in the mists of antiquity. Why should that be? Didnt you mathematicians and scientists save all data, all information, back and back to the misty primeval time when those equations were discovered?"
Seldon groaned and made no attempt to answer. He said, "Well, Hummin, so much for my idea. As we look back into the past and as society grows smaller, a useful psychohistory becomes more likely. But knowledge dwindles even more rapidly than size, so psychohistory becomes less likely--and the less outweighs the more."
"To be sure, there is the Mycogen Sector," said Dors, musing.
Hummin looked up quickly. "So there is and that would be the perfect place to put Seldon. I should have thought of it myself."
"Mycogen Sector," repeated Hari, looking from one to the other. "What and where is Mycogen Sector?"
"Hari, please, Ill tell you later. Right now, I have preparations to make. Youll leave tonight."
第三十二章
　　午餐结束之前，他们二人一直挤在谢顿的房间。谢顿与铎丝偶尔轻声闲聊些毫不相关的话题，夫铭却几乎静默不语。他坐得笔直，吃得很少，而他严肃的表情（使他看来比实际年龄老些，谢顿心想）始终显得沉静与内敛。
谢顿猜想，他一定正在心中检视川陀辽阔的地理，试图寻找一个理想的角落。毫无疑问，这不是什简单的事。
谢顿的故乡赫利肯比川陀大百分之一二，但海洋面积较小，因此赫利肯的陆地表面或许比川陀的大上百分之十。不过赫利肯人口稀疏，表面仅有零星散布的一些城市，川陀整体则是单一的大都会。赫利肯划分为二十个行政区，川陀的行政区则超过八百个，其中每一个又细分成许多复杂的单位。
最后，谢顿带着几分绝望说：“也许最好的办法，是在那些觊觎我的所谓能力的角逐者中，找一个最接近善类的人，然后把我交给他，仰仗他来保护我。”
夫铭抬起头来，以极严肃的口吻说：“没这个必要，我知道哪个角逐者最接近善类，而你已在他手中。”
谢顿微微一笑：“你将自己和卫荷区长，以及整个银河的皇帝等量齐观吗？”
“就地位而言，不是。不过说到想要控制你的渴望，我足以和他们匹敌。然而他们——以及我所能想到的其他人——之所以想得到你，是为了增加他们自己的财富和势力；而我却毫无野心，只为整个银河的福祉着想。”
“我想，”谢顿以平静的语气说，“你的每一个竞争者——如果被人问起——都会坚持他想到的也只有银河的福祉。”
“我确信他们会这么回答。”夫铭说，“可是直到目前为止——套用你的称呼——在我的竞争者之中，你唯一见过的是皇上。他之所以对你有兴趣，是希望你提出一个有助于稳定其皇朝的虚构预测。我并末要求你做任何像这样的事，只要求你将心理史学的技术发展完备，以便做出具有数学根据的预测，哪怕它的本质只是统计性的。”
“实话，至少目前为止。”谢顿似笑非笑地说。
“因此，我或许该问一问：这项工作你进行得如何？可有任何进展？”
谢顿不知应该大笑还是大怒。顿了一会儿之后，他只是勉力以冷静的口吻说：“进展？在不到两个月之内？夫铭，这种事很可能花上我一辈子的时间，还要赔上其后十几代的后继者——而结果仍可能一无所获。”
“我并不是问你有没有导出正确答案，甚至不是问你是否有所突破。你曾经好多次断然地说，实用的心理史学是可能但不可行的。我所问的是。现在是否有将它变成可行的任何希望？”
“坦白说，没有。”
铎丝说：“对不起，我不是数学家，所以希望我提出的问题不会太蠢。你如何知道某样事物既有可能又不可行？我曾听你说过，从理论上讲，你也许能亲自拜访帝国的每一个人。和每一个人打招呼，但实际上是不可行的事，因为你的命不可能那么长。但是，你怎么知道心理史学也属于这一范畴？”
谢顿带着几分不可置信的眼神望着铎丝：“你想要我‘解释’这点？”
“是的。”她使劲点点头，摇动了一头卷发。
“事实上，”夫铭说，“我也想。”
“不用数学？”谢顿带着一丝微笑说。
“拜托。”夫铭说。
“好吧——”他沉默了一下，寻思一个适当的表达方式。然后他说：“如果你要了解宇宙的某个层面，若是你能尽量简化它，仅将与该层面息息相关的性质及特征包括在内，那将对这个问题有莫大帮助。假如你想决定一个物体如何落下。你不必关心它是新还是旧，是红还是绿，或者是否具有某种气味。忽略掉这些性质，你就避免了不必要的复杂。你可将这种简化称为模型或仿真，可以把它实际展现在电脑屏幕上，或是以数学关系式描述。如果你考虑原始的非相对论性重力理论——”
铎丝立刻抗议：“你答应不提到数学。不要企图用‘原始’这个称呼将它偷渡进来。”
“不，不。我所谓的‘原始’，是指有史以来已经存在，它的发现湮没在远古的迷雾中，就像轮子或火的发明一样。无论如何，这种重力理论的方程式蕴涵了对行星系和双星的运动、潮汐的现象，以及其他许多事物的描述。利用这种方程式，我们能建立一个图像仿真，在二维屏幕上表现行星环绕恒星，或是两个恒星互绕的模式；甚至可在三维全息像中建立更加复杂的系统。比起我们必须研究现象的本身，这种简化模拟使我们对现象的掌握容易许多。事实上，若是没有重力方程式，我们对于行星运动的知识，以及一般天体力学的知识，都将变得既贫乏又浅薄。
“当你希望对某个现象了解得更多，或是某个现象变得越复杂时，你就需要更精致的方程式，以及更详细的计算机程序。最后的结果，你会得到一个越来越难掌握的计算机化仿真。”
“你不能建立一个模拟的模拟吗？”夫铭问道，“如此你就会再简化一级。”
“这样的话，你就必须忽略该现象的某些特征，而那正是你想要涵盖的，如此你的模拟将变得毫无用处。所谓的‘最简模拟’——也就是说，可行的最简化模拟，其复杂度的累增比被仿真的对象更迅速，最后仿真终将与现象本身并驾齐驱。因此，早在数千年前，就有人证明出字宙整体，包括全体的复杂度，无法用比它更小的任何模拟来表现。
“换句话说，除非研究整个宇宙，否则你无法获得宇宙整体的任何图像。此外也有人证明，倘若企图以模拟取代宇宙的一小部分，再用另一个模拟取代另一小部分，其他依此类推，打算将这些模拟放在一起，形成宇宙的整体图像，将发现这种部分模拟有无限多个。因此需要无限长的时间，才能了解整个宇宙，这正是不可能获得宇宙全部知识的另一种说法。”
“目前为止。我都了解。”铎丝说，声音带着一点惊讶。
“好的，此外，我们知道某些相当简单的事物很容易模拟，而当事物越来越复杂时，模拟它们就变得越来越难，最后终于变得绝无可能。但究竟在何等复杂度之下，模拟就再也没有可能？嗯，我利用上个世纪才发明的数学技巧——即使动用大型、高速的计算机，这种技巧目前也几乎没什么用——证明出我们的银河社会在临界点这一边，它的确可用比本身更简单的模拟来表现。我还进一步证明，这将导致一种预测未来的能力。它是统计性的，也就是说，算出的是各组可能事件的几率，而非断定哪一组会发生。”
“这样一来，”夫铭说，“既然你的确能有效地模拟银河社会，就只剩下如何着手的问题了。为什么实际上不可行呢？”
“我所证明的，只是了解银河社会不需要无限长的时问，不过若是得花上十亿年，它仍然是不可行的。对我们而言，这和无限长时间其实一样。”
“真要花那么久时问间吗？十亿年！”
“我还无法算出需要多少时间，但我有一种强烈的感觉，至少需要十亿年之久，所以我才会提出这个数字。”
“但你并非真的知道。”
“我正试图把它算出来。”
“没有成功？”
“没有成功。”
“大学图书馆没有帮助吗？”夫铭一面问，一面望了铎丝一眼。
谢顿慢慢摇了摇头：“一点也没有。”
“铎丝帮不上忙吗？”
铎丝叹了一口气：“我对这个题目一窍不通，契特，我只能建议寻找的方向。假如哈里试过之后一无所获，那我就无能为力了。”
夫铭站了起来：“这样的话，留在这所大学就没什么大用，我必须想个别的地方安置你。”
谢顿伸手拉住夫铭的袖子：“我还有另一个想法。”
夫铭微微眯起双眼盯着他，像是很惊讶，又仿佛很怀疑。“你何时想到的？刚才吗？”
“不，早在我去穹顶上之前，这念头就萦绕在我脑中好几天了。那个小变故将它暂时压下去，不过你一问起图书馆，我就想了起来。”
夫铭重新坐下：“告诉我你的想法——假如它并非从头到尾都是数学产物。”
“完全没有数学。只不过是当我在图书馆研读历史时，突然想到银河社会过去并没那么复杂。一万两千年前，当帝国正要建立的时候，银河仅仅包含大约一千万个住人世界。两万年之前，前帝国时代的众千国总共只有一万个世界左右。而在更早更早以前，谁知道社会缩成什么样子？甚至也许只有一个世界，正如你自己提到的那个传说所描述的，夫铭。”
夫铭说：“而你认为，假如你研究一个简单得多的银河社会，就有可能发展出心理史学？”
“是的，我觉得应该可能做到。”
“这样一来，”铎丝突然以热切的口吻说，“假使你发展出过去一个较小社会的心理史学；假使你能根据对前帝时代的研究，预测出帝国形成一千年后的情形——你可以回过头来核对当时的实际情形，看看你距离正确目标多远。”
夫铭以冷漠的语气说：“既然你能事先知道银河纪元一○○○年的情形，这就不算是个客观的测验。你会不自觉地受到既有知识的左右，而你为你的方程式选取的参数，一定会是那些将带给你正确答案的数值。”
“我不这么想：”铎丝说，“我们对银纪一○○○年的情况并不很清楚，我们必须深入探讨。毕竟，那是十一个千年以前。”
谢顿的脸孔现出惶惑的表情：“你说我们对银纪一○○○年的情况并不很清楚，这究竟是什么意思？当时已经有计算机了不是吗，铎丝？”
“当然。”
“还有记忆贮存单位以及视听记录？我们应该保有银纪一○○○年的所有记录，就像我们拥有今年——银纪一二○二○年的所有记录一样。”
“理论上没错，可是实际的情形——嗯，你可知道，哈这正是你常挂在嘴边的。保有银纪一○○○年的一切记录虽有可能，期望做到这点却不切实际。”
“没错，可是我是指数学论证，铎丝。我不晓得它也能应用在历史记录上。”
铎丝以辩护的口吻说：“记录不会永久留存，哈里。记忆库会由于战乱而毁坏或损伤，或因时日久远而腐朽。任何的记忆位，任何的记录，如果长时间未被引用，最后就会淹没在积累的噪声中。据说在帝国图书馆里，整整三分之一的纪录已不知所云，不过，当然，照例是不准移走那些记录的。其他图书馆没有那么多传统的包袱，在川陀大学的图书馆，我们每隔十年就清除一次无价值的数据。
“自然，经常被引用，以及经常在各个世界、各个政府或私人图书馆被复制的记录，几千年后依旧清晰可辨。因此银河历史的许多重大事件，至今仍然家喻户晓，即使它们发生在前帝国时代。然而你越是向前回溯，保存的资料就越少。”
“我无法相信。”谢顿说，“我以为在任何记录濒临损毁时，都会实时重制一份副本。你们怎能任由知识消失呢？”
“没人要的知识就是没用的知识，”铎丝说，“你能想象为了不断维持无人使用的数据，人们所需要消耗的时间、精力和能量吗？这种浪费会随着时间变得越来越严重。”
“你总该考虑到一件事实，那就是在某一天，某个人可能会需要那些被随便丢弃的资料。”
“对某个特定项目的需求，可能一千年才有一次。仅为预防这种需求而保存它，绝不是一件划算的事。即使在科学领域也不例外，你刚才提到重力的原始方程式，说它之所以称为原始，是因为它的发现遗失在远古的迷雾中。为什么会这样？你们数学家和科学家难道不保存所有的数据、一直远溯到发现那些方程式的迷雾般原始时代？”
谢顿哼了一声，并未试图回答这个问题。“好啦，夫铭，我的想法差不多就是这样。当我们回溯过去，社会变得越来越小的时候，实用的心理史学就变得越来越有可能。但是与此同时，知识的缩减甚至比社会规模的缩减更迅速，因此心理史学又越来越没有可能——而后者的效应超越了前者。”
“对啦，有个麦曲生区。”铎丝若有所思地说。
夫铭迅速抬起头来：“没错，那里正是安置谢顿最理想的地方，我自己应该想到。”
“麦曲生区？”谢顿重复了一遍，同时轮流望向另外两人。“麦曲生区在哪里？又是个什么地方？”
“哈里，拜托，我等一下会告诉你。现在我需要做些准备，你今晚就动身。”
Chapter 33

Dors had urged Seldon to sleep a bit. They would be leaving halfway between lights out and lights on, under cover of "night," while the rest of the University slept. She insisted he could still use a little rest.
"And have you sleep on the floor again?" Seldon asked.
She shrugged. "The bed will only hold one and if we both try to crowd into it, neither of us will get much sleep."
He looked at her hungrily for a moment and said, "Then Ill sleep on the floor this time."
"No, you wont. I wasnt the one who lay in a coma in the sleet."
As it happened, neither slept. Though they darkened the room and though the perpetual hum of Trantor was only a drowsy sound in the relatively quiet confines of the University, Seldon found that he had to talk. He said, "Ive been so much trouble to you, Dors, here at the University. Ive even been keeping you from your work. Still, Im sorry Ill have to leave you."
Dors said, "You wont leave me. Im coming with you. Hummin is arranging a leave of absence for me."
Seldon said, dismayed, "I cant ask you to do that."
"Youre not. Hummins asking it. I must guard you. After all, I faded in connection with Upperside and should make up for it."
"I told you. Please dont feel guilty about that.--Still, I must admit I would feel more comfortable with you at my side. If I could only be sure I wasnt interfering with your life ..."
Dors said softly, "Youre not, Hari. Please go to sleep."
Seldon lay silent for a while, then whispered, "Are you sure Hummin can really arrange everything, Dors?"
Dors said, "Hes a remarkable man. Hes got influence here at the University and everywhere else, I think. If he says he can arrange for an indefinite leave for me, Im sure he can. He is a most persuasive man."
"I know," said Seldon. "Sometimes I wonder what he really wants of me."
"What he says," said Dors. "Hes a man of strong and idealistic ideas and dreams."
"You sound as though you know him well, Dors."
"Oh yes, I know him well."
"Intimately?"
Dors made an odd noise. "Im not sure what youre implying, Hari, but, assuming the most insolent interpretation-- No, I dont know him intimately. What business would that be of yours anyway?"
"Im sorry," said Seldon. "I just didnt want, inadvertently, to be invading someone elses--"
"Property? Thats even more insulting. I think you had better go to sleep."
"Im sorry again, Dors, but I cant sleep. Let me at least change the subject. You havent explained what the Mycogen Sector is. Why will it be good for me to go there? Whats it like?"
"Its a small sector with a population of only about two million--if I remember correctly. The thing is that the Mycogenians cling tightly to a set of traditions about early history and are supposed to have very ancient records not available to anyone else. Its just possible they would be of more use to you in your attempted examination of pre-Imperial times than orthodox historians might be. All our talk about early history brought the sector to mind."
"Have you ever seen their records?"
"No. I dont know anyone who has."
"Can you be sure that the records really exist, then?"
"Actually, I cant say. The assumption among non-Mycogenians is that theyre a bunch of madcaps, but that may be quite unfair. They certainly say they have records, so perhaps they do. In any case, we would be out of sight there. The Mycogenians keep strictly to themselves.--And now please do go to sleep."
And somehow Seldon finally did.

第三十三章
　　铎丝曾劝谢顿小睡片刻。他们准备于照明熄灭与开启之间，趁大学里其他人都熟睡时，在“夜色”的掩护下离开。她坚持出发之前，他还可以稍事休息。
“而让你再睡在地板上？”谢顿问道。
她耸了耸肩：“这张床只能容纳一个人，假如我们硬要挤在一起，两个人都没法睡好。”
他以渴望的目光望了她一会儿，然后说：“那么这次我来睡地板吧。”
“不，不行，在冰珠中不省人事的不是我。”
结果两个人都没睡。虽然他们已将室内照明调暗。虽然在相当安静的校园中，川陀永不止息的嗡嗡声成了催眠曲，谢顿却觉得有几句话必须说出来。
他说：“自从我来到这所大学之后，铎丝，我为你添了很多麻烦，甚至害你无法工作。然而，如今我不得不离开你，我仍然感到很遗憾。”
铎丝说：“你不会离开我，我们会一块走。夫铭正在安排让我休一次长假。”
谢顿惊慌地说：“我不能要求你那样做。”
“你没有，是夫铭要求的，我必须保护你。毕竟，穹顶上的意外我未能尽到责任，我应该弥补一下。”
“我跟你说过，请别再为那件事情感到内疚——然而，我必须承认，有你在身边我会感到自在许多。只要我能确定，我不会干扰你的生活…一”
铎丝柔声说道：“你没有，哈里，睡一会儿吧。”
谢顿静默了一阵子，然后悄声说道：“你确定夫铭真能安排一切吗，铎丝？”
铎筵说：“他是个了不起的人。他的影响力遍及各地，我想连这所大学也不例外。要是他说能为我安排一次无限期的长假，我就确信他能做到。他是个极具说服力的人。”
“我知道。”谢顿说，“有时我不禁怀疑，他究竟想从我身上得到什么？”
“就是他告诉过你的。”铎丝说，“他是一个怀抱着强烈、完美的理想和梦想的人。”
“听来你好像十分了解他，铎丝。”
“嗯，我十分了解他。”
“亲密吗？”
铎丝发出一下怪声：“我不确定你是指什么，哈里，可是，姑且套用最无礼的解释。不，我对他的了解并不涉及私人部分。不过，这又关你什么事？”
“我道歉。”谢顿说，“我只是不想在无意之间侵犯到别人的……”
“财产？这更是瞧不起人。我想你最好还是睡觉吧。”
“我再度道歉，铎丝，可是我实在睡不着，至少容我改变一下话题。你还没解释麦曲生区是什么地方，为什么我适合到那里去？它像什么样子？”
“它是个小区，人口大约只有两百万，如果我没记错的话。重要的是，麦曲生人紧守着一套与早期历史有关的传统，而且想必拥有非常古老的记录，那是任何外人都无法取得的。既然你企图检视前帝国时代的历史，他们可能比正统历史学家对你更有用。我们谈论的那些早期历史问题，使我突然想到这个区。”
“你曾看过他们的记录吗？”
“没有，我不知道有谁看过。”
“那么，你能确定那些记录真的存在吗？”
“其实，我也不敢说。在许多外人的心目中，他们只是一群狂妄之徒，不过这也许相当不公平。他们确实声称拥有那些记录，或许他们真的有。无论如何，我们在那里不会受到任何注意。麦曲生人绝对不跟外人来往——现在请你务必睡一会儿吧。”
这回谢顿总算睡着了。
Chapter 34
Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili left the University grounds at 0300. Seldon realized that Dors had to be the leader. She knew Trantor better than he did--two years better. She was obviously a close friend of Hummin (how close? the question kept nagging at him) and she understood his instructions. Both she and Seldon were swathed in light swirling docks with tight-fitting hoods. The style had been a short-lived clothing fad at the University (and among young intellectuals, generally) some years back and though right now it might provoke laughter, it had the saving grace of covering them well and of making them unrecognizable--at least at a cursory glance.
Hummin had said, "Theres a possibility that the event Upperside was completely innocent and that there are no agents after you, Seldon, but lets be prepared for the worst."
Seldon had asked anxiously, "Wont you come with us?"
"I would like to," said Hummin, "but I must limit my absence from work if I am not to become a target myself. You understand?"
Seldon sighed. He understood.
They entered an Expressway car and found a seat as far as possible from the few who had already boarded. (Seldon wondered why anyone should be on the Expressways at three in the morning--and then thought that it was lucky some were or he and Dors would be entirely too conspicuous.)
Seldon fell to watching the endless panorama that passed in review as the equally endless line of coaches moved along the endless monorail on an endless electromagnetic field.
The Expressway passed row upon row of dwelling units, few of them very tall, but some, for all he knew, very deep. Still, if tens of millions of square kilometers formed an urbanized total, even forty billion people would not require very tall structures or very closely packed ones. They did pass open areas, in most of which crops seemed to be growing--but some of which were clearly parklike. And there were numerous structures whose nature he couldnt guess. Factories? Office buildings? Who knew? One large featureless cylinder struck him as though it might be a water tank. After all, Trantor had to have a fresh water supply. Did they sluice rain from Upperside, filter and treat it, then store it? It seemed inevitable that they should. Seldon did not have very long to study the view, however.
Dors muttered, "This is about where we should be getting off." She stood up and her strong fingers gripped his arm.
They were off the Expressway now, standing on solid flooring while Dors studied the directional signs.
The signs were unobtrusive and there were many of them. Seldons heart sank. Most of them were in pictographs and initials, which were undoubtedly understandable to native Trantorians, but which were alien to him.
"This way," said Dors.
"Which way? How do you know?"
"See that? Two wings and an arrow."
"Two wings? Oh." He had thought of it as an upside-down "w," wide and shallow, but he could see where it might be the stylized wings of a bird. "Why dont they use words?" he said sullenly.
"Because words vary from world to world. What an air-jet is here could be a soar on Cinna or a swoop on other worlds. The two wings and an arrow are a Galactic symbol for an air vessel and the symbol is understood everywhere. Dont you use them on Helicon?"
"Not much. Helicon is a fairly homogeneous world, culturally speaking, and we tend to cling to our private ways firmly because were overshadowed by our neighbors."
"See?" said Dors. "Theres where your psychohistory might come in. You could show that even with different dialects the use of set symbols, Galaxy-wide, is a unifying force."
"That wont help." He was following her through empty dim alleyways and part of his mind wondered what the crime rate might be on Trantor and whether this was a high-crime area. "You can have a billion rules, each covering a single phenomenon, and you can derive no generalizations from that. Thats what one means when one says that a system might be interpreted only by a model as complex as itself.--Dors, are we heading for an air-jet?"
She stopped and turned to look at him with an amused frown. "If were following the symbols for air-jets, do you suppose were trying to reach a golf course? Are you afraid of air-jets in the way so many Trantorians are?"
"No, no. We fly freely on Helicon and I make use of air-jets frequently. Its just that when Hummin took me to the University, he avoided commercial air travel because he thought we would leave too clear a trail."
"Thats because they knew where you were to begin with, Hari, and were after you already. Right now, it may be that they dont know where you are and were using an obscure port and a private air-jet."
"And wholl be doing the flying?"
"A friend of Hummins, I presume."
"Can he be trusted, do you suppose?"
"If hes a friend of Hummins, he surely can."
"You certainly think highly of Hummin," said Seldon with a twinge of discontent.
"With reason," said Dors with no attempt at coyness. "Hes the best."
Seldons discontent did not dwindle.
"Theres the air-jet," she said.
It was a small one with oddly shaped wings. Standing beside it was a small man, dressed in the usual glaring Trantorian colors.
Dors said, "Were psycho."
The pilot said, "And Im history."
They followed him into the air-jet and Seldon said, "Whose idea were the passwords?"
"Hummins," said Dors.
Seldon snorted. "Somehow I didnt think Hummin would have a sense of humor. Hes so solemn."
Dors smiled.
Sunmaster
SUNMASTER FOURTEEN-- ... A leader of the Mycogen Sector of ancient Trantor ...
As is true of all the leaders of this ingrown sector, little is known of him. That he plays any role at all in history is due entirely to his interrelationship with Hari Seldon in the course of The Flight ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

第三十四章
　　哈里•谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里在○三○○时离开大学校园。谢顿明白必须让铎丝做向导，因为她比他更熟悉川陀——熟悉度相差两年。她显然是夫铭的一位密友（有多亲密？这个问题一直在他脑际回响），而且她能了解他的指示。
她与谢顿都套上一件附有贴身兜帽、随风摇曳的轻质斗篷。几年以前，这种款式的服装曾在大学里（以及一般年轻知识分子间）流行过一段短时间。虽然如今它也许会引人发笑，但至少有一项优点，那就是能将他们遮掩得很好，使他们不会被认出来——至少匆匆一瞥之下不会被识破。
先前夫铭曾说：“穹顶上的意外有可能完全是单纯事件，根本没有特务想抓你，谢顿，不过还是让我们做最坏的打算。”
谢顿则以渴求的口吻问道：“你不跟我们一块走吗？”
“我很想这么做，”夫铭说，“可是，为了避免我自己成为目标，我一定不能离开工作岗位太久。你了解吗？”
谢顿叹了一口气，他的确了解。
他们上了磁浮捷运，尽量远离已在车厢中的几名乘客。（谢顿不禁纳闷，清晨三点的时候，磁浮捷运车厢中为何还会有人。然后他才想到，其实有人是他们的运气，否则他与铎丝会变得太显眼。）
当绵延不绝的磁浮捷运车厢沿着绵延不绝的单轨，在绵延不绝的电磁场下前进时，谢顿开始观赏窗外同样绵延不绝、好像接受检阅般通过的风景。
磁浮捷运经过一排又一排的居住单位，其中只有极少数堪称高楼，但是据他所知，有些房舍相当深入地底。然而既然二亿平方公里已形成一个都会化整体，即使是四百亿众的人口，也不会需要非常高的建筑，或是住得非常紧密。他们的确也曾通过空旷地区，大部分似乎都种有农作物，不过某些显然像是公园。此外，还有许多建筑的用途他猜不到。工厂吗，还是办公大厦，谁知道呢？有个巨大而毫无特色的圆柱体，他认为好像是贮水槽。无论如何，川陀必须有清水供应系统。他们是否将雨水从穹顶上引下来，加以过滤消毒，然后贮存起来？这似乎是他们唯一的办法。
不过，谢顿没有太长的时间研究这些景物。
铎丝突然低声说：“我们该下车的地方就在附近。”她站了起来，强有力的手指紧紧抓住他的臂膀。
不久他们下了车，重新站在坚实的地板上，铎丝开始研究方向指示标志。
那些标志毫不起眼，而且为数众多，令谢顿的心不禁一沉。其中大多数是图形符号与缩写，毫无疑问，川陀本地人一定都能了解，但是对他而言却完全陌生。
“这边走。”铎丝说。
“哪边走？你怎么知道？”
“看到那个吗？两根翅膀加一个箭头。”
“两根翅膀？噢。”他本以为那是写得又宽又扁的一个字母，不过现在看起来的确有点像符号化的一对鸟翼。
“他们为什么不用文字？”他闷闷不乐地问。
“因为文字在各个世界不尽相同。这里所谓的‘喷射机’，在锡纳或许是‘飞翔机’，在其他一些世界却是‘雷霆机’。而两根翅膀加一个箭头，则是代表飞行器的银河标准符号，任何地方的人都看得懂——你们在赫利肯不用这些符号吗？”
“不多，就文化而言，赫利肯是个相当同质化的世界。我们倾向于紧守自己的行事方式，因为近邻的强势文化令我们有危机感。”
“瞧！”铎丝说，“这就是你的心理史学可能用得上的地方。你可以证明虽然有许多不同的方言，全银河使用同样的符号仍是一种团结力量。”
“这没什么帮助。”他跟着她穿过空旷、阴暗的巷道，部分心思在嘀咕川陀的犯罪率有多高，这里是不是高犯罪率地区，“你可以找出十亿条规则，每条涵盖一个单一现象，却无法从中导出一般性通则。这就是所谓的：一个系统只能用与本身同样复杂的模型加以解释——铎丝，我们要去搭喷射机吗？”
她停了下来，转身望向他，皱着眉头露出苦笑。“既然我们沿着喷射机的符号前进，你以为我们要去高尔夫球场吗？你是不是像许多川陀人一样，对喷射机感到恐惧？”
“不，不。我们在赫利肯总是飞来飞去，我自己也常搭喷射机。只不过当夫铭带我到川陀大学时，他刻意避开商业空中交通，以免我们留下太明显的行迹。”
“那是因为当初他们知道你在哪里，哈里，而且正在跟踪你。如今，或许他们并不知道你的行踪，何况我们将使用一座偏僻的机场，以及一架私人喷射机。”
“由谁来驾驶呢？”
“夫铭的一位朋友，我猜想。”
“能信任他吗？”
“假如他是夫铭的朋友，当然就信得过。”
“你对夫铭确实推崇备至。”谢顿的语气有点不服气。
“这是有理由的，”铎丝毫无腼腆之色，“他是最棒的人。”
谢顿的不服并未因此减轻。
“喷射机就在前面。”她说。
那是一架小型喷射机，有着一对奇形怪状的机翼。有个身材矮小的人站在旁边，穿的衣服是令人眼花缭乱的川陀流行色彩。
铎丝说：“我们是心理。”
那位驾驶员说：“我是史学。”
他们跟他上了喷射机之后，谢顿说：“这组口令是谁的点子？”
“夫铭的。”铎丝说。
谢顿哼了一声：“我不晓得夫铭还会有幽默感，他是那么严肃的人。”
铎丝微笑不语。
Chapter 35

There were just two seats behind the compact pilot compartment and when Seldon sat down on padding that gave slowly beneath him meshed fabric came forward to encircle his legs, waist, and chest and a hood came down over his forehead and ears. He felt imprisoned and when he turned to his left with difficulty--and only slightly--he could see that Dors was similarly enclosed.
The pilot took his own seat and checked the controls. Then he said, "Im Endor Levanian, at your service. Youre enmeshed because there will be a considerable acceleration at lift-off. Once were in the open and flying, youll be released. You neednt tell me your names. Its none of my business." He turned in his seat and smiled at them out of a gnomelike face that wrinkled as his lips spread outward. "Any psychological difficulties, youngsters?"
Dors said lightly, "Im an Outworlder and Im used to flying."
"That is also true for myself," said Seldon with a bit of hauteur.
"Excellent, youngsters. Of course, this isnt your ordinary air-jet and you may not have done any night flying, but Ill count on you to bear up."
He was enmeshed too, but Seldon could see that his arms were entirely free.
A dull hum sounded inside the jet, growing in intensity and rising in pitch. Without actually becoming unpleasant, it threatened to do so and Seldon made a gesture as though to shake his head and get the sound out of his ears, but the attempt to do so merely seemed to stiffen the hold of the head-mesh. The jet then sprang (it was the only verb Seldon could find to describe the event) into the air and he found himself pushed hard against the back and bottom of his seat.
Through the windshield in front of the pilot, Seldon saw, with a twinge of horror, the flat rise of a wall--and then a round opening appear in that wall. It was similar to the hole into which the air-taxi had plunged the day he and Hummin had left the Imperial Sector, but though this one was large enough for the body of the jet, it certainly did not leave room for the wings. Seldons head turned as far to the right as he could manage and did so just in time to see the wing on his side wither and collapse. The jet plunged into the opening and was seized by the electromagnetic field and hurtled along a lighted runnel. The acceleration was constant and there were occasional clicking noises that Seldon imagined might be the passing of individual magnets.
And then, in less than ten minutes, the jet was spewed out into the atmosphere, headlong into the sudden pervasive darkness of night. The jet decelerated as it passed beyond the electromagnetic field and Seldon felt himself flung against the mesh and plastered there for a few breathless moments.
Then the pressure ceased and the mesh disappeared altogether.
"How are you, youngsters?" came the cheerful voice of the pilot.
"Im not sure," said Seldon. He turned to Dors. "Are you all right?"
"Certainly," she answered. "I think Mr. Levanian was putting us through his paces to see if we were really Outworlders. Is that so, Mr. Levanian?"
"Some people like excitement," said Levanian. "Do you?"
"Within limits," said Dors.
Then Seldon added approvingly, "As any reasonable person would admit." Seldon went on. "It might have seemed less humorous to you, sir, if you had ripped the wings off the jet."
"Impossible, sir. I told you this is not your ordinary air-jet. The wings are thoroughly computerized. They change their length, width, curvature, and overall shape to match the speed of the jet, the speed and direction of the wind, the temperature, and half a dozen other variables. The wings wouldnt tear off unless the jet itself was subjected to stresses that would splinter it."
There was a spatter against Seldons window. He said, "Its raining.
"It often is," said the pilot.
Seldon peered out the window. On Helicon or on any other world, there would have been lights visible--the illuminated works of man. Only on Trantor would it be dark.
Well, not entirely. At one point he saw the flash of a beacon light. Perhaps the higher reaches of Upperside had warning lights. As usual, Dors took note of Seldons uneasiness. Patting his hand, she said, "Im sure the pilot knows what hes doing, Hari."
"Ill try to be sure of it, too, Dors, but I wish hed share some of that knowledge with us," Seldon said in a voice loud enough to be overheard.
"I dont mind sharing," said the pilot. "To begin with, were heading up and well be above the cloud deck in a few minutes. Then there wont be any rain and well even see the stars."
He had timed the remark beautifully, for a few stars began to glitter through the feathery cloud remnants and then all the rest sprang into brightness as the pilot flicked off the lights inside the cabin. Only the dim illumination of his own instrument panel remained to compete, and outside the window the sky sparkled brightly.
Dors said, "Thats the first time in over two years that Ive seen the stars. Arent they marvelous? Theyre so bright--and there are so many of them."
The pilot said, "Trantor is nearer the center of the Galaxy than most of the Outworlds."
Since Helicon was in a sparse corner of the Galaxy and its star field was dim and unimpressive, Seldon found himself speechless.
Dors said, "How quiet this flight has become."
"So it is," said Seldon. "What powers the jet, Mr. Levanian?"
"A microfusion motor and a thin stream of hot gas."
"I didnt know we had working microfusion air-jets. They talk about it, but--"
"There are a few small ones like this. So far they exist only on Trantor and are used entirely by high government officials."
Seldon said, "The fees for such travel must come high."
"Very high, sir."
"How much is Mr. Hummin being charged, then?"
"Theres no charge for this flight. Mr. Hummin is a good friend of the company who owns these jets."
Seldon grunted. Then he asked, "Why arent there more of these microfusion air-jets?"
"Too expensive for one thing, sir. Those that exist fulfill all the demand."
"You could create more demand with larger jets."
"Maybe so, but the company has never managed to make microfusion engines strong enough for large air-jets."
Seldon thought of Hummins complaint that technological innovation had declined to a low level. "Decadent," he murmured.
"What?" said Dors.
"Nothing," said Seldon. "I was just thinking of something Hummin once said to me."
He looked out at the stars and said, "Are we moving westward, Mr. Levanian?"
"Yes, we are. How did you know?"
"Because I thought that we would see the dawn by now if we were heading east to meet it."
But dawn, pursuing the planet, finally caught up with them and sunlight--real sunlight brightened the cabin walls. It didnt last long, however, for the jet curved downward and into the clouds. Blue and gold vanished and were replaced by dingy gray and both Seldon and Dors emitted disappointed cries at being deprived of even a few more moments of true sunlight.
When they sank beneath the clouds, Upperside was immediately below them and its surface--at least at this spot--was a rolling mixture of wooded grottos and intervening grassland. It was the sort of thing Clowzia had told Seldon existed on Upperside.
Again there was little time for observation, however. An opening appeared below them, rimmed by lettering that spelled MYCOGEN.
They plunged in.
第三十五章
第八部 日主
日主十四：……古川陀麦曲生区的一位领袖……
与这个故步自封之区的其他领袖一样，其生平事迹鲜为人知。他在历史上得以占一席之地，全是由于他与“逃亡期”的哈里•谢顿所产生的千丝万缕的关系……
——《银河百科全书》


第三十五章
狭窄的驾驶舱后面只有两个座位。当谢顿坐下来，椅垫缓缓下陷之时，突然出现一团网状纤维，将他的双腿、腰际、胸部紧紧缠住，此外还有一个头罩套住他的前额与耳朵。他感到像是被五花大绑，当他勉强转头向左望去——只转动了很小的角度——看见铎丝也处于相同的处境。
驾驶员就位之后，开始检查控制面板。然后他说：“我是恩多•列凡尼亚，在此为你们服务。你们现在被紧紧网住，是因为起飞时将有相当大的加速度。一旦我们到达露天空间，开始正常飞行之后，你们马上会恢复自由。两位的名字不必告诉我，那不关我的事。”
他在座位上转过头来，对两位旅客微微一笑。当他嘴角向外撇时，精怪般的脸孔皱成一团。“有任何心理上的障碍吗，年轻人？”
铎丝轻描淡写地同道：“我是外星人士，我习惯了。”
“我也一样。”谢顿带着一丝高傲说。
“好极了，年轻人。当然，这不是你们常见的喷射机，而且你们或许没有夜间飞行经验，但我希望你们撑得住。”
他自己同样也被网住，不过谢顿看到他的双臂仍能活动自如。
喷射机内部传出一阵单调的嗡嗡声，强度与音调都越来越高，虽然还不算刺耳，却也逐渐接近极限。谢顿做了一个动作，仿佛想要摇摇头，将耳朵里的噪音甩出来，但他的努力似乎只让头网箍得更紧。
然后喷射机便弹入空中（谢顿只能想到用“弹”这个动词来形容），谢顿发觉自己被一股强大的力压向坐垫与椅背。
透过驾驶员面前的挡风玻璃，谢顿看到一面墙壁陡然升起，令他冒出一身冷汗。接着那面墙上出现一个圆形洞口，类似当日他与夫铭离开皇区时，驾着出租飞车冲进去的那个小洞。不过这个洞口虽然足以容纳喷射机机身，却绝对没有为机翼留下多余空间。
谢顿尽可能将头转向右方，刚好及时看到右侧机翼正在折叠收缩。
喷射机冲进洞口之后，立刻被其中的电磁场攫获，开始沿着一条光明的隧道向前疾驶。加速度始终维持定值，偶尔会传来一下“喀哒喀哒”的噪音，谢顿猜想这可能是机身经过各个磁体时造成的。
不到十分钟，这架喷射机便被隧道“喷”入大气层，迅疾冲进一片黑暗的夜空中。
喷射机在离开电磁场后开始减速，谢顿感到整个身子顶住安全网，粘在那里好一阵子，几乎令他无法呼吸。
最后压力终于消失，安全网也一下子不见了。
“你们都还好吧，年轻人？”驾驶员快活的声音传过来。
“我不确定。”谢顿转向铎丝问道，“你还好吗？”
“当然。”她答道，“我想列凡尼亚先生是故意在考验我们，看看我们是否真是外星人士。是不是这样，列凡尼亚先生？”
“有些人喜欢刺激。”列凡尼亚说，“你们呢？”
“要有限度。”铎丝说。
谢顿随即附和：“任何有理智的人都会承认这一点。”
接着谢顿又说：“要是你把机翼折断的话，阁下，你大概就不会觉得那么好玩了。”
“不可能，阁下。我告诉过你，这不是你们常见的喷射机。它的机翼完全计算机化，会随时改变长度、宽度、曲率和整体形状，以便配合喷射机的速率、风速、风向和气温，以及其他五六种变量。除非喷射机处于足以粉碎它的外力之下，否则机翼绝不会折断。”
此时谢顿的窗口响起一阵稀里哗啦的声响：“外面在下雨。”
“经常如此。”驾驶员说。
谢顿转头向窗外望去。在赫利肯或是其他任何世界，一定都能看到光线——人工照明。只有在川陀，下面将是一片漆黑。
——嗯，并不尽然。在某个地点，他看见一个闪烁的信号灯光。或许，穹顶上的高处都装有警告信号。
如同往常一样，铎丝察觉到谢顿的不安。她拍拍他的手，说道：“我确信驾驶员知道自己在做什么，哈里。”
“我会试着去相信这点，铎丝，但我希望他能和我们分享一些目前的状况。”谢顿故意用驾驶员听得到的音量说。
“我不介意和你们分享。”驾驶员说，“首先，喷射机目前正在上升，几分钟之后，即将抵达云层之上。那里不会有任何雨水，我们甚至可以看到星辰。”
他将这句话的时间算得准确无比，话才说完，羽毛般的残云中正好闪现出几颗星星。驾驶员将机舱内的光源关掉，其他星辰突然大放光明。机舱内只剩下仪表板的微弱光芒，窗外的天空则是明亮耀眼的星光。
铎丝说：“两年多以来，这还是我第一次看见星辰。是小是很壮观？它们是那么明亮，数量如此众多。”
驾驶员说：“川陀比大多数的外星世界更接近银河中心。”
由于赫利肯位于银河中星辰稀疏的一隅，星象场向来暗淡而毫不起眼，谢顿不觉看得目瞪口呆。
铎丝说：“飞行变得多么宁静啊。”
“的确如此，”谢顿说，“这架喷射机用什么动力，列凡尼亚先生？”
“微融合发动机，以及稀薄的热气流。”
“我不知道我们有实用的微融合喷射机。是有人在讨论，不过……”
“只有几架像这样的小型机种，目前只在川陀可见，而且专供政府高级官员使用。”
谢顿说：“乘这种喷射机旅行的费用一定很昂贵。”
“的确不便宜，阁下。”
“那么，夫铭得付多少钱？”
“这趟飞行完全免费，夫铭先生是本公司的好朋友。”
谢顿低哼一声，然后问道：“这种微融合喷射机为何不多见？”
“理由之一是太贵，阁下。此外，现存的几架已能满足需求。”
“如果制造较大的喷射机，就能创造更多的需求。”
“或许如此，但公司无法使微融合引擎进一步强化，以达到大型喷射机动力要求。”
谢顿想起夫铭的牢骚：科技的进展已经衰退到一个低水平。“衰落——”他喃喃地白语。
“什么？”铎丝问。
“没什么。”谢顿说，“我只是想起夫铭对我说的一些话。”
他望着外面的繁星，又说：“我们往西飞吗，列凡尼亚先生？”
“是啊，没错，你怎么知道？”
“因为我想到，如果我们往东迎着黎明，现在应该看到曙光了。”
不过，环绕行星的曙光最后还是追上他们，阳光——真正的阳光——照亮了整个舱壁。然而阳光露脸的时间并不长，喷射机很快就向下俯冲，重新钻入云层。蓝色的天空与金色的阳光随即消失，取而代之的是一片昏黑。谢顿与铎丝都发出失望的感叹，惋惜他们无法更多地享受真正的阳光。
当他们沉到云层之下时，穹顶立刻出现在他们下面，而它的表面——至少在这个地区——是一片绿色的起伏波浪，由树木茂密的凹洼与夹杂其间的草地交织而成。根据克劳吉雅的说法，那正是穹顶上应有的景观。
然而这次他仍没有多少时间仔细观察。不久之后，下面出现一个洞口，边缘标示着“麦曲生”几个大字。
他们立刻俯冲而进。
Chapter 36
They landed at a jetport that seemed deserted to Seldons wondering eyes. The pilot, having completed his task, shook hands with both Hari and Dors and took his jet up into the air with a rush, plunging it into an opening that appeared for his benefit.
There seemed, then, nothing to do but wait. There were benches that could seat perhaps a hundred people, but Seldon and Dors Venabili were the only two people around. The port was rectangular, surrounded by walls in which there must be many tunnels that could open to receive or deliver jets, but there were no jets present after their own had departed and none arrived while they waited. There were no people arriving or any indications of habitation; the very life hum of Trantor was muted.
Seldon felt this aloneness to be oppressive. He turned to Dors and said, "What is it that we must do here? Have you any idea?"
Dors shook her head. "Hummin told me we would be met by Sunmaster Fourteen. I dont know anything beyond that."
"Sunmaster Fourteen? What would that be?"
"A human being, I presume. From the name I cant be certain whether it would be a man or a woman."
"An odd name."
"Oddity is in the mind of the receiver. I am sometimes taken to be a man by those who have never met me."
"What fools they must be," said Seldon, smiling.
"Not at all. Judging from my name, they are justified. Im told it is a popular masculine name on various worlds."
"Ive never encountered it before."
"Thats because you arent much of a Galactic traveler. The name Hari is common enough everywhere, although I once knew a woman named Hare, pronounced like your name but spelled with an e. In Mycogen, as I recall, particular names are confined to families--and numbered."
"But Sunmaster seems so unrestrained a name."
"Whats a little braggadocio? Back on Cinna, Dors is from an Old local expression meaning spring gift. "
"Because you were born in the spring?"
"No. I first saw the light of day at the height of Cinnas summer, but the name struck my people as pleasant regardless of its traditional--and largely forgotten--meaning."
"In that case, perhaps Sunmaster--"
And a deep, severe voice said, "That is my name, tribesman."
Seldon, startled, looked to his left. An open ground-car had somehow drawn close. It was boxy and archaic, looking almost like a delivery wagon. In it, at the controls, was a tall old man who looked vigorous despite his age. With stately majesty, he got out of the ground-car. He wore a long white gown with voluminous sleeves, pinched in at the wrists. Beneath the gown were soft sandals from which the big toe protruded, while his head, beautifully shaped, was completely hairless. He regarded the two calmly with his deep blue eyes.
He said, "I greet you, tribesman."
Seldon said with automatic politeness, "Greetings, sir." Then, honestly puzzled, he asked, "How did you get in?"
"Through the entrance, which closed behind me. You paid little heed."
"I suppose we didnt. But then we didnt know what to expect. Nor do we now."
"Tribesman Chetter Hummin informed the Brethren that there would be members from two of the tribes arriving. He asked that you be cared for."
"Then you know Hummin."
"We do. He has been of service to us. And because he, a worthy tribesman, has been of service to us, so must we be now to him. There are few who come to Mycogen and few who leave. I am to make you secure, give you houseroom, see that you are undisturbed. You will be safe here."
Dors bent her head. "We are grateful, Sunmaster Fourteen."
Sunmaster turned to look at her with an air of dispassionate contempt. "I am not unaware of the customs of the tribes," he said. "I know that among them a woman may well speak before being spoken to. I am therefore not offended. I would ask her to have a care among others of the Brethren who may be of lesser knowledge in the matter."
"Oh really?" said Dors, who was clearly offended, even if Sunmaster was not.
"In truth," agreed Sunmaster. "Nor is it needful to use my numerical identifier when I alone of my cohort am with you. Sunmaster will be sufficient.--Now I will ask you to come with me so that we may leave this place which is of too tribal a nature to comfort me."
"Comfort is for all of us," said Seldon, perhaps a little more loudly than was necessary, "and we will not budge from this place unless we are assured that we will not be forcibly bent to your liking against our own natures. It is our custom that a woman may speak whenever she has something to say. If you have agreed to keep us secure, that security must be psychological as well as physical."
Sunmaster gazed at Seldon levelly and said, "You are bold, young tribesman. Your name?"
"I am Hari Seldon of Helicon. My companion is Dors Venabili of Cinna."
Sunmaster bowed slightly as Seldon pronounced his own name, did not move at the mention of Dorss name. He said, "I have sworn to Tribesman Hummin that we will keep you safe, so I will do what I can to protect your woman companion in this. If she wishes to exercise her impudence, I will do my best to see that she is held guiltless.--Yet in one respect you must conform." And he pointed, with infinite scorn, first to Seldons head and then to Dorss.
"What do you mean?" said Seldon.
"Your cephalic hair."
"What about it?"
"It must not be seen."
"Do you mean were to shave our heads like you? Certainly not."
"My head is not shaven, Tribesman Seldon. I was depilated when I entered puberty, as are all the Brethren and their women."
"If were talking about depilation, then more than ever the answer is no--never."
"Tribesman, we ask neither shaving nor depilation. We ask only that your hair be covered when you are among us."
"How?"
"I have brought skincaps that will mold themselves to your skulls, together with strips that will hide the superoptical patches the eyebrows. You will wear them while with us. And of course, Tribesman Seldon, you will shave daily--or oftener if that becomes necessary."
"But why must we do this?"
"Because to us, hair on the head is repulsive and obscene."
"Surely, you and all your people know that it is customary for others, in all the worlds of the Galaxy, to retain their cephalic hair."
"We know. And those among us, like myself, who must deal with tribesmen now and then, must witness this hair. We manage, but it is unfair to ask the Brethren generally to suffer the sight."
Seldon said, "Very well, then, Sunmaster--but tell me. Since you are born with cephalic hair, as all of us are and as you all retain it visibly till puberty, why is it so necessary to remove it? Is it just a matter of custom or is there some rationale behind it?"
And the old Mycogenian said proudly, "By depilation, we demonstrate to the youngster that he or she has become an adult and through depilation adults will always remember who they are and never forget that all others are but tribesmen."
He waited for no response (and, in truth, Seldon could think of none) but brought out from some hidden compartment in his robe a handful of thin bits of plastic of varying color, stared keenly at the two faces before him, holding first one strip, then another, against each face. "The colors must match reasonably," he said. "No one will be fooled into thinking you are not wearing a skincap, but it must not be repulsively obvious."
Finally, Sunmaster gave a particular strip to Seldon and showed him how it could be pulled out into a cap.
"Please put it on, Tribesman Seldon," he said. "You will find the process clumsy at first, but you will grow accustomed to it."
Seldon put it on, but the first two times it slipped off when he tried to pull it backward over his hair.
"Begin just above your eyebrows," said Sunmaster. His fingers seemed to twitch, as though eager to help.
Seldon said, suppressing a smile, "Would you do it for me?"
And Sunmaster drew back, saying, almost in agitation, "I couldnt. I would be touching your hair."
Seldon managed to hook it on and followed Sunmasters advice, in pulling it here and there until all his hair was covered. The eyebrow patches fitted on easily. Dors, who had watched carefully, put hers on without trouble.
"How does it come off?" asked Seldon.
"You have but to find an end and it will peel off without trouble. You will find it easier both to put on and take off if you cut your hair shorter."
"Id rather struggle a bit," said Seldon. Then, turning to Dors, he said in a low voice, "Youre still pretty, Dors, but it does tend to remove some of the character from your face."
"The character is there underneath just the same," she answered. "And I dare say youll grow accustomed to the hairless me."
In a still lower whisper, Seldon said, "I dont want to stay here long enough to get accustomed to this."
Sunmaster, who ignored, with visible haughtiness, the mumblings among mere tribesmen, said, "If you will enter my ground-car, I will now take you into Mycogen."
第三十六章
　　他们于一处喷射机场降落，在谢顿少见多怪的眼中，这个机场似乎已被废弃。
驾驶员在完成任务后，与谢顿及铎丝分别握了握手，便驾着喷射机一飞冲天，钻进一个专门为他打开的洞口。
然后，似乎唯有等待。附近的长椅或许可坐上一百人，放眼望去却只有谢顿与铎丝两个人。这座机场呈长方形，四周皆围有高墙，其中一定有许多可开肩的隧道，用以迎送来往的喷射机。但在他们搭乘的喷射机离去后，这里一架也不剩；而在他们等候的过程中，也没有其他的飞机抵达。
没有任何人到来，没有任何住人的迹象，连川陀从不间断的嗡嗡声都停止了。
谢顿觉得这种孤寂令人窒息，他转向铎丝说：“为什么我们非得待在这里？你知道吗？”
铎丝摇了摇头：“夫铭告诉我，日主十四将会和我们碰头，除此之外我一无所知。”
“日主十四，那是什么东西？”
“一个人吧，我这么猜。单从这个名字，我无法确定此人是男是女。”
“好古怪的名字。”
“古怪源于听者本身。有些时候，一些从末见过我的人会以为我是男性。”
“他们一定很笨。”谢顿微笑着说。
“一点也不，光从我的名字判断，他们并没有错。有人告诉我，在某些世界上，这是个很普遍的男性名字。”
“我以前从没碰到过。”
“那是因为你不算是个银河旅客。‘哈里’这个名字很普通，不过我遇见过一位名叫‘哈莉’的女性，发音跟你的名字很接近，但第二个字是茉莉的‘莉’。我记得在麦曲生，各家族都有一些专属的特殊名字——而且还加上编号。”
“可是，拿日主当私字似乎太狂了。”
“有点自夸又有何妨？在我们锡纳，‘铎丝’源自当地一个古老的词汇，意思是‘春天的礼物’。”
“因为你是在春天出生的？”
“不是，我睁开眼睛时正逢锡纳的盛夏。不过家人觉得这个名字很好听，也就不在乎它的传统意义，何况原意几乎已被遗忘殆尽。”
“既然这样，或许日主……”
一个低沉、严肃的声音说道：“那是我的名字，外族男子。”
谢顿吓了一跳，立刻朝左方望去，一辆敞篷地面车不知何时已悄然接近。它的式样古朴，外形四四方方，看来几乎像是一辆货车。驾驶座上坐着一位高大的老者，他虽然上了年纪，看来仍然精力允沛。此时他走下车来，举止显得高贵而威严。
他身穿一件白色长袍，宽大的袖子在手腕处束紧。长袍下面是一双软质凉鞋，两根大脚趾露在外面。他的头形生得不错，头上却一根头发也没有。他正以一双深蓝色的眼珠，冷静地打量面前的两个人。
“你好，外族男子。”他说。
谢顿礼貌性地回了一句：“你好，阁下。”然后，由于实在感到困惑，他又问道：“你是怎么进来的？”
“从入口进来。我进来之后入口重新关闭，你没有留意。”
“我想我们的确没有留意。可是刚才我们不知道在等什么，即使现在也不知道。”
“外族男子契特•夫铭通知兄弟们，说将有两个外族的成员前来，嘱托我们好好照顾。”
“那你认识夫铭喽。”
“没错，他帮助过我们。因为这位可敬的外族男子帮过我们，所以我们现在务必要帮他。很少有人来到麦曲生，也很少有人离去。我会负责你的安全，为你提供住所，确保你不受侵扰，你在这里将安然无事。”
铎丝低下头来：“我们很感激，日主十四。”
日主转头望着她，带着一种不为所动的不屑神情：“我并非不懂外族习俗，”他说．“我知道在他们之间，女人大可未经问话便径自开口，因此我并不牛气。若是面对或许不清楚内情的兄弟，我请她一定要注意。”
“哦，真的吗？”虽然日主没有生气，铎丝却显然被惹火了。
“千真万确。”日主说，“此外，当我是本支族唯一的在场者时，也没有必要使用我的识别编号，‘日主’就足够了。现在请两位跟我走，我们要离开这个地方。此地外族气氛太重，令我感到不太自在。”
“自在是这里每一个人的权利，”谢顿的音量或许稍嫌大了一点，“除非我们能得到保证，不会强迫我们放弃自我来顺应你们，否则我们不会移动半步。根据我们的习俗，女性想说什么随时可以开口。假如你答应保障我们的安全，这种安全必须兼顾身体与心理两方面。”
口主直直瞪着谢顿：“你很大胆，外族年轻男子。你的名字？”
“我是来自赫利肯的哈里•谢顿，我的同伴是来自锡纳的铎丝•凡纳比里。”
谢顿报出自己的姓名，日主微微欠身，而听到铎丝名字时他却毫无动作。“我曾对外族男子夫铭发誓，我们会保障你的安全，所以在这件事情上，我将尽一己之力保护你的女伴。若是她想表现得厚颜无耻，我也会竭力帮她脱罪。可是，有一点你们一定要顺从。”
然后他带着无比的轻蔑，先指了指谢顿的头部，然后再指向铎丝。
“什么意思？”谢顿问道。
“你们的头部毛发。”
“那又怎么样？”
“绝不能被看见。”
“你的意思是，我们得像你一样把头发剃光？当然不行。”
“我的头发不是剃的，外族男子谢顿。我进入青春期之后，就接受了脱毛手术，正如所有兄弟以及他们的女人一样。”
“如果我们讨论的是脱毛手术，那么答案就更加肯定——绝对办不到。”
“外族男子，我们既不要求你剃头，也不要求你脱毛。我们只要求你在跟我们相处时，把你的头发遮掩起来。”
“怎么做？”
“我带来一些人皮帽，它可以紧贴你的头颅，并且附有两条带子，用来遮住眼上毛发，也就是眉毛。你和我们在一起时一定要戴着它。当然，外族男子谢顿，你还得每天刮脸——或者刮得更勤些，若有必要的话。”
“可是我们为何必须这样做？”
“因为对我们而言，头上的毛发既淫秽又惹人厌。”
“不用说，你和你的同胞都知道，在银河所有的世界上，蓄留头部毛发是其他族人共有的习俗。”
“这点我们知道。而在我们族人中，那些必须偶尔和外族人打交道的，例如我自己，有时不得不目睹毛发。我们虽能勉强忍受，但要一般兄弟受这种罪却实在不公平。”
谢顿说：“很好，那么，日主——请告诉我，既然你本有与生俱来的毛发，像我们大家一样，而且一直公然蓄留到青春期，又为何一定要除掉它呢？是否只是习俗使然，还是背后有什么理论基础？”
这位麦曲生老者骄傲地说：“借由脱毛手术，我们向年轻人昭示他们已经长大成人。此外通过脱毛手术，成人将一直记得他们是什么人，永远不会忘记其他人都只是外族人。”
他不等对方作出回应（老实说，谢顿也想不出能有什么回应），便从长袍的隐藏式套袋中掏出一把五颜六色的塑料薄膜，以尖锐的目光望着面前的两张面孔，然后分别拿出两片薄膜在两人脸旁比了比。
“颜色必须配合恰当。”他说，“没人会傻到以为你们未戴人皮帽，但一定不能明显得令人反感。”
最后，日主挑出一片递给谢顿，并且示范如何将它拉成一顶帽子。
“请戴上。外旅男子谢顿。”他说，“刚开始你会觉得笨手笨脚，不过你会渐渐习惯。”
谢顿戴上人皮帽，但是当他试图将它向后拉，以便盖住头发的时候，人皮帽却滑掉了两次。
“从你的眉毛正中额顶上开始。”日主说，他的手指似乎在扯动，好像很想帮忙的样子。
谢顿强忍住笑，说道：“你能不能帮我？”
日主后退了儿步，以近乎激动的口气说：“不行，那样我会碰到你的头发。”
谢顿设法将人皮帽勾住前额，然后依着日主的指导，拉拉这里，扯扯那里，总算将头发全部盖住。接下来，调整眉毛遮带倒没遇上什么问题。铎丝在一旁看得仔细，毫不费力就戴上了她那一顶。
“怎么脱掉呢？”谢顿问。
“你只要找到任何一端，就能轻易将它剥下来。若是你将头发剪短一点，脱戴都会比较容易。”
“我宁愿多费点力气。”谢顿说完转向铎丝，压低了声音说：“你还是一样漂亮，铎丝，不过你的脸部特征的确被掩盖了一部分。”
“那些特征依然完好地藏在下面。”她答道，“我敢说，你会渐渐习惯没有头发的我。”
谢顿以更小的声音说：“我不想在这里待人久，不要久到习惯这一点。”
日主眉宇间尽是高傲的神色，毫不理会两个外族人之间的低语。“请登上我的地面车，我现在就带你们进麦曲生。”
Chapter 37

"Frankly," whispered Dors, "I can scarcely believe Im on Trantor."
"I take it, then, youve never seen anything like this before?" said Seldon.
"Ive only been on Trantor for two years and Ive spent much of my time at the University, so Im not exactly a world traveler. Still, Ive been here and there and Ive heard of this and that, but Ive never seen or heard of anything like this. The sameness."
Sunmaster drove along methodically and without undue haste. There were other wagonlike vehicles in the roadway, all with hairless men at the controls, their bald pates gleaming in the light.
On either side there were three-story structures, unornamented, all lines meeting at right angles, everything gray in color.
"Dreary," mouthed Dors. "So dreary."
"Egalitarian," whispered Seldon. "I suspect no Brother can lay claim to precedence of any obvious kind over any other."
There were many pedestrians on the walkways as they passed. There were no signs of any moving corridors and no sound of any nearby Expressway.
Dors said, "Im guessing the grays are women."
"Its hard to tell," said Seldon. "The gowns hide everything and one hairless head is like another."
"The grays are always in pairs or with a white. The whites [also] walk alone and Sunmaster is a white."
"You may be right." Seldon raised his voice. "Sunmaster, I am curious."
"If you are, then ask what you wish, although I am by no means required to answer."
"We seem to be passing through a residential area. There are no signs of business establishments, industrial areas--"
"We are a farming community entirely. Where are you from that you do not know this?"
"You know I am an Outworlder," Seldon said stiffly. "I have been on Trantor for only two months."
"Even so."
"But if you are a farming community, Sunmaster, how is it that we have passed no farms either?"
"On lower levels," said Sunmaster briefly.
"Is Mycogen on this level entirely residential, then?"
"And on a few others. We are what you see. Every Brother and his family lives in equivalent quarters; every cohort in its own equivalent community; all have the same ground-car and all Brothers drive their own. There are no servants and none are at ease through the labor of others. None may glory over another."
Seldon lifted his shielded eyebrows at Dors and said, "But some of the people wear white, while some wear gray."
"That is because some of the people are Brothers and some are Sisters."
"And we?"
"You are a tribesman and a guest. You and your"--he paused and then said--"companion will not be bound by all aspects of Mycogenian life. Nevertheless, you will wear a white gown and your companion will wear a gray one and you will live in special guest quarters like our own."
"Equality for all seems a pleasant ideal, but what happens as your numbers increase? Is the pie, then, cut into smaller pieces?"
"There is no increase in numbers. That would necessitate an increase in area, which the surrounding tribesmen would not allow, or a change for the worse in our way of life."
"But if--" began Seldon.
Sunmaster cut him off. "It is enough, Tribesman Seldon. As I warned you, I am not compelled to answer. Our task, which we have promised our friend Tribesman Hummin, is to keep you secure as long as you do not violate our way of life. That we will do, but there it ends. Curiosity is permitted, but it wears out our patience quickly if persisted in."
Something about his tone allowed no more to be said and Seldon chafed.
Hummin, for all his help, had clearly mis-stressed the matter. It was not security that Seldon sought. At least, not security alone. He needed information too and without that he could not--and would not--stay here.
第三十七章
　　“坦白说，”铎丝悄声道，“我几乎无法相信自己还在川陀。”
“你是说，你从未见过像这样的景观？”谢顿问。
“我来川陀不过两年，许多时间都待在大学里，所以我不算是个环球旅客。然而我还是去过一些地方，听过一些风土民情。但我从未见过或听过有什么地方像这里这样千篇一律。”
日主稳当地驾车前进，一点也没有急着赶路的意思。路上还有些像是货车的车辆，坐在驾驶座的人一律寸发不生。在光线的照耀下，他们的光头全都闪闪发亮。
道路两旁有些朴实无华的三层楼建筑，所有的线条都以直角相交，每一个角落都是灰色。
“死气沉沉，”铎丝夸张地说，“真是死气沉沉。”
“平等主义。”谢顿轻声说道，“据我猜想，没有一个兄弟能声称在任何方面比任何人更有特权。”
沿途的人行道上有许多行人，但不见任何活动回廊的踪迹，附近也听不到任何磁浮捷运的声音。
铎丝说：“我猜穿灰色的是女性。”
“很难判断，”谢顿说，“长袍遮掩了一切，而每个光头看来又都差不多。”
“穿灰色的总是成双成对，否则就跟一个穿白色的在一起。穿白色的可以单独行走，而且日主也身穿白色长袍。”
“你也许说对了。”谢顿提高音量说道，“日主，我很好奇……”
“若是好奇的话，就随便问吧，不过我绝无义务回答。”
“我们似乎正经过一个住宅区，没有任何商用建筑，或是工业区的迹象……”
“我们是个纯粹的农业社会，你从哪里来的，怎么会不知道这一点？”
“你知道我是外星人士，”谢顿硬生生地说，“我来川陀只不过两个月。”
“够长了。”
“但你们若是个农业社会，日主，我们怎么也没经过任何农场呢？”
“都在较低的层级。”日主简短答道。
“那么，麦曲生这一层全都是住宅区吗？”
“还有其他几层。我们就是你见到的样子，每位兄弟和他的家人住在同等的寓所，每个支族住在同等的小区，大家都有同样的地面车，所有的兄弟都自己驾驶。没有任何奴仆，也没有人靠他人劳力享清福。此外，更没有人能觉得高人一等。”
谢顿向铎丝扬了扬被遮起的眉毛，又说：“但是某些人穿着白袍，某些则穿灰袍。”
“那是因为某些人是兄弟，而某些人是姐妹。”
“我们呢？”
“你是一名外族男子，一位客人。你和你的——”他顿了一下，“——同伴不会受到麦曲生生活方式的任何束缚。然而，你得穿一件白袍，你的同伴得穿一件灰的。你们将住在特别的客房，它和我们的寓所一模一样。”
“众生平等似乎是个迷人的理想，可是当你们的人口增加时，又会发生什么情形？是不是将大饼切成较小块？”
“人口绝不会增加。否则我们必须争取更多土地，周围的外族人不会允许这种事情；而若不然，我们的生活方式就会每况愈下。”
“可是万一——”谢顿的话只讲了-半。
日主将他的话打断：“够了，外族男子谢顿。我提醒过你，我没有义务回答你的问题。我们的任务，我们对我们的朋友——外族男子夫铭所做的承诺，是只要你不侵犯我们的生活方式，我们便会尽力保障你的安全。我们会做到这点，不过仅止于此。好奇心可以有，但你若是纠缠不休，那我们的耐性很快会被磨光。”
他的语调透出不容对方再开口的意思，令谢顿感到又急又气。夫铭虽然帮了那么大的忙，却显然将重点本末倒置。
谢顿寻求的不是安全，至少不仅是安全。他还需要寻找线索，要是得不到，他就不能——也不会——待在此地。
Chapter 38
Seldon looked with some distress at their quarters. It had a small but individual kitchen and a small but individual bathroom. There were two narrow beds, two clothes closets, a table, and two chairs. In short there was everything that was necessary for two people who were willing to live under cramped conditions.
"We had an individual kitchen and bathroom at Cinna," said Dors with an air of resignation.
"Not I," said Seldon. "Helicon may be a small world, but I lived in a modern city. Community kitchens and bathrooms.--What a waste this is. You might expect it in a hotel, where one is compelled to make a temporary stay, but if the whole sector is like this, imagine the enormous number and duplications of kitchens and bathrooms."
"Part of the egalitarianism, I suppose," said Dors. "No fighting for favored stalls or for faster service. The same for everyone."
"No privacy either. Not that I mind terribly, Dors, but you might and I dont want to give the appearance of taking advantage. We ought to make it clear to them that we must have separate rooms--adjoining but separate."
Dors said, "Im sure it wont work. Space is at a premium and I think they are amazed by their own generosity in giving us this much. Well just make do, Hari. Were each old enough to manage. Im not a blushing maiden and youll never convince me that youre a callow youth."
"You wouldnt be here, were it not for me."
"What of it? Its an adventure."
"All right, then. Which bed will you take? Why dont you take the one nearer the bathroom?" He sat down on the other. "Theres something else that bothers me. As long as were here, were tribespeople, you and I, as is even Hummin. Were of the other tribes, not their own cohorts, and most things are none of our business.--But most things are my business. Thats what Ive come here for. I want to know some of the things they know."
"Or think they know," said Dors with a historians skepticism. "I understand they have legends that are supposed to date back to primordial times, but I cant believe they can be taken seriously."
"We cant know that until we find out what those legends are. Are there no outside records of them?"
"Not that I know of. These people are terribly ingrown. Theyre almost psychotic in their inward clinging. That Hummin can break down their barriers somewhat and even get them to take us in is remarkable--really remarkable."
Seldon brooded. "There has to be an opening somewhere. Sunmaster was surprised--angry, in fact--that I didnt know Mycogen was an agricultural community. That seems to be something they dont want kept a secret."
"The point is, it isnt a secret. Mycogen is supposed to be from archaic words meaning yeast producer. At least, thats what Ive been told. Im not a paleolinguist. In any case, they culture all varieties of microfood--yeast, of course, along with algae, bacteria, multicellular fungi, and so on."
"Thats not uncommon," said Seldon. "Most worlds have this microculture. We have some even on Helicon."
"Not like Mycogen. Its their specialty. They use methods as archaic as the name of their section--secret fertilizing formulas, secret environmental influences. Who knows what? All is secret."
"Ingrown?"
"With a vengeance. What it amounts to is that they produce protein and subtle flavoring, so that their microfood isnt like any other in the world. They keep the volume comparatively low and the price is skyhigh. Ive never tasted any and Im sure you havent, but it sells in great quantities to the Imperial bureaucracy and to the upper classes on other worlds. Mycogen depends on such sales for its economic health, so they want everyone to know that they are the source of this valuable food. That, at least, is no secret."
"Mycogen must be rich, then."
"Theyre not poor, but I suspect that its not wealth theyre after. Its protection. The Imperial government protects them because, without them, there wouldnt be these microfoods that add the subtlest flavors, the tangiest spices, to every dish. That means that Mycogen can maintain its odd way of life and be haughty toward its neighbors, who probably find them insupportable."
Dors looked about. "They live an austere life. Theres no holovision, I notice, and no book-films."
"I noticed one in the closet up on the shelf." Seldon reached for it, stared at the label, and then said in clear disgust, "A cookbook."
Dors held out her hand for it and manipulated the keys. It took a while, for the arrangement was not quite orthodox, but she finally managed to light the screen and inspect the pages. She said, "There are a few recipes, but for the most part this seems to consist of philosophical essays on gastronomy." She shut it off and turned it round and about. "It seems to be a single unit. I dont see how one would eject the microcard and insert another. A one-book scanner. Now thats a waste."
"Maybe they think this one book-film is all anyone needs." He reached toward the end table that was between the two beds and picked up another object. "This could be a speaker, except that theres no screen."
"Perhaps they consider the voice sufficient."
"How does it work, I wonder?" Seldon lifted it and looked at it from different sides. "Did you ever see anything like this?"
"In a museum once--if this is the same thing. Mycogen seems to keep itself deliberately archaic. I suppose they consider that another way of separating themselves from the so-called tribesmen that surround them in overwhelming numbers. Their archaism and odd customs make them indigestible, so to speak. Theres a kind of perverse logic to all that."
Seldon, still playing with the device, said, "Whoops! It went on. Or something went on. But I dont hear anything."
Dors frowned and picked up a small felt-lined cylinder that remained behind on the end table. She put it to her ear. "Theres a voice coming out of this," she said. "Here, try it." She handed it to him.
Seldon did so and said, "Ouch! It clips on." He listened and said, "Yes, it hurt my ear. You can hear me, I take it.--Yes, this is our room. No, I dont know its number. Dors, have you any idea of the number?"
Dors said, "Theres a number on the speaker. Maybe that will do."
"Maybe," said Seldon doubtfully. Then he said into the speaker, "The number on this device is 6LT-3648A. Will that do?--Well, where do I find out how to use this device properly and how to use the kitchen, for that matter?--What do you mean, It all works the usual way? That doesnt do me any good. See here, Im a ... a tribesman, an honored guest. I dont know the usual way.--Yes, Im sorry about my accent and Im glad you can recognize a tribesman when you hear one. My name is Hari Seldon."
There was a pause and Seldon looked up at Dors with a longsuffering expression on his face. "He has to look me up. And I suppose hell tell me he cant find me.--Oh, you have me? Good! In that case, can you give me the information?--Yes. Yes.--Yes.--And how can I call someone outside Mycogen?--Oh, then what about contacting Sunmaster Fourteen, for instance?--Well, his assistant then, his aide, whatever?--Uh-huh.--Thank you."
He put the speaker down, unhooked the hearing device from his ear with a little difficulty, turned the whole thing off, and said, "Theyll arrange to have someone show us anything we need to know, but he cant promise when that might be. You cant call outside Mycogen--not on this thing anyway--so we couldnt get Hummin if we needed him. And if I want Sunmaster Fourteen, Ive got to go through a tremendous rigmarole. This may be an egalitarian society, but there seem to be exceptions that I bet no one will openly admit." He looked at his watch. "In any case, Dors, Im not going to view a cookbook and still less am I going to view learned essays. My watch is still telling University time, so I dont know if its officially bedtime and at the moment I dont care. Weve been awake most of the night and I would like to sleep."
"Thats all right with me. Im tired too."
"Thanks. And whenever a new day starts after weve caught up on our sleep, Im going to ask for a tour of their microfood plantations."
Dors looked startled. "Are you interested?"
"Not really, but if thats the one thing theyre proud of, they should be willing to talk about it and once I get them into a talking mood then, by exerting all my charm, I may get them to talk about their legends too. Personally, I think thats a clever strategy."
"I hope so," said Dors dubiously, "but I think that the Mycogenians will not be so easily trapped."
"Well see," said Seldon grimly. "I mean to get those legends."
第三十八章
　　谢顿怀着几分不悦打量他们的住所。它包含一间小而独立的厨房，以及一间小而独立的浴室。此外还有两张窄床、两个衣柜、一张桌子与两把椅子。简言之，只要两个人愿意挤一挤，一切生活所需倒也一应俱全。
“在锡纳，我们也有独立的厨房和浴室。”铎丝以逆来顺受的口气说。
“我可没有。”谢顿说，“赫利肯或许是个小型世界，可是我住在一个现代化的都市，大家一律使用公共厨房和浴室——这样多浪费啊，在不得不暂时栖身的旅馆里，有可能碰到这种情形，但如果全区都像这样，试想会有多少的厨房和浴室，会造成多少重复。”
“这是平等主义的一环吧，我猜想。”铎丝说，“不必抢夺中意的那几间，也不必争先恐后，每个人的都一样。”
“可是也没有隐私。我是不会太介意，铎丝，但是你也许会，我不要造成一种占你便宜的假象。我们应该跟他们说清楚，我们两人的房间一定要分开，相连但分开。”
铎丝说：“我确定不会有什么用。此地空间非常宝贵，我想他们给了我们这么大的地方，自己都会为自己的慷慨感到惊讶。我们就凑合一下吧，哈里。我们两人都不小了，足以应付这种状况。我不是个害羞的闺女，你也无法让我相信你是个稚嫩的少年。”
“耍不是我．你也小会到这里来。”
“那又怎么样？这是一次探险啊。”
“好吧，那么，你要选哪一张床？就选靠近浴室的那一张吧？”他坐到另一张床上，“还有另一件事困扰我。不论我们在这里待多久，我们总是外族人，你和我，甚至夫铭也是。我们属于其他部族，不是他们自己的支族，大多数的事又都和我们无关——可是大多数的事又都和我有关。那正是我来到此地的目的，我要知道一些他们知道的事。”
“也许是他们自以为知道的事。”铎丝以历史学家的怀疑口吻说，“我知道他们拥有许多传说，理论上可远溯太初时代，但我不相信这些传说值得认真看待。”
“在我们发现这些传说是什么之前，我们不能妄下断语。外界没有相关的记录吗？”
“据我所知并没有。这些人极端封闭，他们墨守成规几乎已到疯狂的地步。夫铭竟有办法打破他们的藩篱，甚至让他们接纳我们，这实在了不起——简直令人叹服。”
谢顿沉思了一下：“一定有可以切入的缺口。我不知道麦曲生是个农业社会，这点令日主感到惊讶——事实下是愤怒，这似乎不是他们想要保密的一件事。”
“问题是那并非什么秘密。麦曲生’应该是源自古文，原意为‘酵母生产者’。至少我是这么听说的，我自己不是古代语言学家。总之，他们培养各种各样的微生食品，酵母菌当然不在话下，此外还有藻类、细菌、多细胞真菌等等。”
“这没什么不寻常。”谢顿说，“大多数世界都有这种微生养殖业，就连我们赫利肯也有一些。”
“麦曲生却不同，这是他们的专长。他们使用的方法和这个区的名字同样古老——秘密的肥料配方、秘密的养殖环境。谁知道还有什么？反正全是秘密。”
“故步自封。”
“还极端彻底！结果是他们培养出丰富的蛋白质和精妙的香味，所以他们的微生食品和其他世界完全不同。他们将产量控制得相当低，因此得以卖到天价。我从来没尝过，我确定你也没有，不过它大量出售给帝国官僚，以及其他世界的上层社会。麦曲生依赖这砦出口维持稳健的经济，因此他们要大家都知道，此地是这种珍贵食品的出产地。这一点，至少并不是秘密。”
“这么说的话，麦曲生一定很富有。”
“他们并不穷，但我怀疑他们追求的并非财富，而是一种保护。帝国政府会保护他们，因为若是没有他们，就不会有这些微生食品为每道菜肴添加最精妙、最浓烈的香味。这就是，麦曲生之所以可以维持他们古怪的生活方式，并且对近邻摆出高傲的姿态的缘故，虽然后者或许觉得无法忍受。”
铎丝四下望了望：“他们过着一种简朴的生活，我注意到根本没有全息电视，也没有胶卷书。”
“我发现架子上的橱子里有一本。”谢顿将它取下，仔细看了看标签，然后以明显嫌恶的口吻说：“一本食谱。”
铎丝伸手接过，开始拨弄上面的控制键。这花了她一会儿工夫，因为键钮的排列与一般用法并不相同，不过最后她总算将屏幕开启，开始检视各页的内容。她说：“里面是有些食谱，不过大部分内容似乎是有关烹饪的哲学小品。”
她将胶卷书关上，拿在手中上下左右翻弄着。“它似乎是一体成型的机座，我看不出该如何更换微缩书卡——本书的专用扫描机，这才叫作浪费。”
“或许，他们认为这本胶卷书就是大家唯一需要的。”说完，他从两床间的小桌上拿起另一样东西。“这可能是个话筒，只不过没有屏幕。”
“说不定他们认为有声音就够了。”
“不知道它如何操作？”谢顿将它举起来，从不同的角度观察，“你见过这样的东西吗？”
“在博物馆看过一次——如果两者相同的话。麦曲生似乎刻意要维持古风，我想，这是他们和周遭比例悬殊的所谓外族人隔离的另一个方法。他们的古风和古怪习俗，可以这么说，使他们变得食古不化。这里头有一种邪门的逻辑。”
仍在玩弄那个装置的谢顿突然说：“哈！打开了，或是某样东西开了，可是我什么也没听到。”
铎丝皱了皱眉头，拿起留在小桌上、具有毛毡衬里的一个小圆柱体，然后将它凑到耳边。“有声音从这里传出来，”她说，“来，试试看。”说完使将它递给谢顿。
谢顿依言照做，随即喊道：“噢！它夹住我了。”
他听了一会儿，又说：“是的，它弄痛了我的耳朵。我想你能听到我……是的，这里是我们的房间……不，我不知道号码。铎丝，你知道房间号码吗？”
铎丝说：“话筒上有一组号码，也许就是。”
“也许吧。”谢顿以怀疑的n吻答道，又对着话筒说：“这个装置上的号码是6LT3648A，这样可以吗……好，我在哪里可以找到这个装置，以及厨房的正确使用法……你说‘都是通常的方法’是什么意思？这样说对我一点用也没有……听好，我是一个——一个外族人，一位贵客。我不知道什么是通常的方法……
“是的，抱歉我有口音，我很高兴你听到我的声音就认出我是外族人……我的名字叫哈里•谢顿。”
等了一下之后，谢顿抬头望向铎丝，脸上露出饱受苦难的表情。“他得查查我的记录，我猜他会告诉我，说他根本找不到……喔，你找到了？好！这样的话，你能提供我这些答案吗……是的……是的……是的……还有，我要怎样打电话找麦曲生外面的人……喔，比方说，要如何联络日主十四……好吧，那么他的助手，他的助理，不论是谁……喔，喔……谢谢你。”
他放下话筒，又花了一点力气，才把收听装置从耳朵上取下。他将开关关掉，然后说：“他们会帮我们安排，找个人来告诉我们需要知道的一切细节，但他无法保证什么时候能安排好。你无法打电话到麦曲生外面去——反正用这玩意不行，所以如果我们需要夫铭时，也无法和他取得联络。而如果我想找日主十四，我得先说上一大堆废话。这也许是个平等主义的社会，可是似乎仍有例外，我敢打赌没有人会公开承认。”
他看了看计时带，“无论如何，铎丝，我可不要阅览一本食谱，更不要阅览说教的小品。我的计时带指示的仍是斯璀璘时间，所以我不知道现在是不是已到正式就寝时间，不过此时此刻我也不在乎。我们大半夜都没合眼，我想要睡一会儿。”
“我没有意见，我也累了。”
“谢谢。不管新的一天什么时候开始，等我们补足睡眠后，我将要求他们带我去参观微生食品养殖场。”
锋丝显得有些惊讶：“你有兴趣吗？”
“不是很有兴趣，但那若是他们引以为自豪的一件事，他们应该愿意谈谈。一旦让他们有了淡活的兴致，那么，借机施展我的所有魅力，或许能让他们也谈谈麦曲生的传说。在我个人看来，这不失为一个高明的策略。”
“我也希望如此，”铎丝以半信半疑的口吻说，“不过我想麦曲生人不会那么容易落入圈套。”
“我们等着瞧。”谢顿绷着脸说。
Chapter 39
The next morning found Hari using the calling device again. He was angry because, for one thing, he was hungry.
His attempt to reach Sunmaster Fourteen was deflected by someone who insisted that Sunmaster could not be disturbed.
"Why not?" Seldon had asked waspishly.
"Obviously, there is no need to answer that question," came back a cold voice.
"We were not brought here to be prisoners," said Seldon with equal coldness. "Nor to starve."
"Im sure you have a kitchen and ample supplies of food."
"Yes, we do," said Seldon. "And I do not know how to use the kitchen devices, nor do I know how to prepare the food. Do you eat it raw, fry it, boil it, roast it ?"
"I cant believe you are ignorant in such matters."
Dors, who had been pacing up and down during this colloquy, reached for the device and Seldon fended her off, whispering, "Hell break the connection if a woman tries to speak to him."
Then, into the device, he said more firmly than ever, "What you believe or dont believe doesnt matter to me in the least. You send someone here--someone who can do something about our situation--or when I reach Sunmaster Fourteen, as I will eventually, you will pay for this."
Nevertheless, it was two hours before someone arrived (by which time Seldon was in a state of savagery and Dors had grown rather desperate in her attempt to soothe him).
The newcomer was a young man whose bald pate was slightly freckled and who probably would have been a redhead otherwise.
He was bearing several pots and he seemed about to explain them when he suddenly looked uneasy and turned his back on Seldon in alarm. "Tribesman," he said, obviously agitated. "Your skincap is not well adjusted."
Seldon, whose impatience had reached the breaking point, said, "That doesnt bother me."
Dors, however, said, "Let me adjust it, Hari. Its just a bit too high here on the left side."
Seldon then growled, "You can turn now, young man. What is your name?"
"I am Graycloud Five," said the Mycogenian uncertainly as he turned and looked cautiously at Seldon. "I am a novitiate. I have brought a meal for you." He hesitated. "From my own kitchen, where my woman prepared it, tribesman." He put the pots down on the table and Seldon raised one lid and sniffed the contents suspiciously. He looked up at Dors in surprise.
"You know, it doesnt smell bad."
Dors nodded. "Youre right. I can smell it too."
Graycloud said, "Its not as hot as it ought to be. It cooled off in transport. You must have crockery and cutlery in your kitchen."
Dors got what was needed, and after they had eaten, largely and a bit greedily, Seldon felt civilized once more.
Dors, who realized that the young man would feel unhappy at being alone with a woman and even unhappier if she spoke to him, found that, by default, it fell to her to carry the pots and dishes into the kitchen and wash them--once she deciphered the controls of the washing device.
Meanwhile, Seldon asked the local time and said, somewhat abashed, "You mean its the middle of the night?"
"Indeed, tribesman," said Graycloud. "Thats why it took a while to satisfy your need."
Seldon understood suddenly why Sunmaster could not be disturbed and thought of Grayclouds woman having to be awakened to prepare him a meal and felt his conscience gnaw at him. "Im sorry," he said. "We are only tribespeople and we didnt know how to use the kitchen or how to prepare the food. In the morning, could you have someone arrive to instruct us properly?"
"The best I can do, tribesmen," said Graycloud placatingly, "is to have two Sisters sent in. I ask your pardon for inconveniencing you with feminine presence, but it is they who know these things."
Dors, who had emerged from the kitchen, said (before remembering her place in the masculine Mycogenian society), "Thats fine, Graycloud. Wed love to meet the Sisters."
Graycloud looked at her uneasily and fleetingly, but said nothing.
Seldon, convinced that the young Mycogenian would, on principle, refuse to have heard what a woman said to him, repeated the remark. "Thats fine, Graycloud. Wed love to meet the Sisters."
His expression cleared at once. "I will have them here as soon as it is day."
When Graycloud had left, Seldon said with some satisfaction, "The Sisters are likely to be exactly what we need."
"Indeed? And in what way, Hari?" asked Dors.
"Well, surely if we treat them as though they are human beings, they will be grateful enough to speak of their legends."
"If they know them," said Dors skeptically. "Somehow I have no faith that the Mycogenians bother to educate their women very well."

第三十九章
　　第二天早上，谢顿再度使用通话装置。他一肚子火，原因之一是他肚子空了。
他试图联络日主十四，不料却被挡驾，那人坚持现在不可打扰日主。
“为何不可？”谢顿气冲冲地问道。
“这个问题没有回答的必要。”传回一句冰冷的声音。
“我们被带到此地，不是来当囚犯的。”谢顿以同样冰冷的声音说，“也不是来挨饿的。”
“我确定你那里有厨房，还有充足的食物。”
“没错，我们的确有。”谢顿说，“但我不懂如何使用厨房的设备，也不知道怎样料理这些食物——生吃、油炸、水煮还是烧烤？”
“我不信你对这种事毫无概念。”
一直在旁边踱来踱去的铎丝，此时伸手想抓过通话装置，谢顿却将她的手推开，悄声说道：“如果有女人想要跟他说话，他会立刻切断通讯。”
然后，他对着通话装置，以更加坚定的语气说：“你信不信和我一点关系也没有。你马上派个人来这里，一个可以改善我们目前处境的人，否则当我联络上日主十四的时候——我总会找到他的，你就要为此付出代价。”
然而两小时之后才有人来到。（而此时谢顿已等得发狂，一直试图安抚他的铎丝几乎快绝望了。）
来者是一名年轻男子，他的光头上有些细细的斑点。若是未曾脱毛的话，他或许会有一头红发。
他随身带了几口锅，本来好像正准备说什么，但他突然显得不安，慌慌张张地转身背对谢顿。“外族男子，”他显然心乱如麻，“你的人皮帽没调整好。”
谢顿的耐性已达到崩溃的临界点，他说：“我一点也不介意。”
不过铎丝赶紧说：“让我来调整一下，哈里，只是左边这里高了点。”
然后，谢顿咆哮道：“现在你可以转身了，年轻人。你叫什么名字？”
“我叫灰云五。”这位麦曲生人一面以迟疑的口吻回答，一面转过身来谨慎地打量谢顿。“我是个新手，为你送一顿饭来。”他犹豫了一下，义说，“在我自家的厨房，由我的女人准备的，外族男子。”
他将锅放到桌上之后，谢顿掀起其中一个盖子，以狐疑的态度凑过去闻了一下。然后他抬起头来，带着惊讶的神情望向铎丝，“你知道吗，闻起来真不赖。”
铎丝点了点头：“说得没错，我也闻到了。”
灰云蜕：“现在已经没有刚出炉那么热，在途中冷了不少。你们一定有锅碗瓢盆吧。”
铎丝随即取出必需的餐具。在他们近乎狼吞虎咽地大吃一顿之后，谢顿这才觉得又回到了文明世界。
铎丝明白如果让这个年轻人与一位女性独处，他一定会感到不安；而自己如果跟他说话，将会令他更不高兴。因此，她认为将锅与碗盘端进厨房清洗，理所当然成了她的工作——只要她能弄懂如何操作洗碗装置。
与此同时，谢顿问明了当地时问，立刻有些难为情地说：“你的意思是——现在正是午夜？”
“的确没错，外族男子。”灰云说，“这就是为什么得花点时间才能满足你的需求。”
谢顿突然明白日主为何不能受到打扰，又想到为了替他准备这顿饭，灰云的女人不得不半夜起床，良心顿时感到不安。“我很抱歉，”他说，“不过我们是外族人，不知道如何使用厨房和如何料理食物。明天早上，你能不能找个人过来指导我们？”
“我能做的最好安排，外族男子，”灰云以抚慰的口吻说，“就是派两个姐妹前来。我请你原谅因女性的出现而造成的不便，但这些事只有她们才清楚。”
刚从厨房里走出来的铎丝（忘记了自己在麦曲生男性社会中的身份）此时说道：“没关系，灰云，我们很高兴接待姐妹。”
灰云以迅速而不安的眼光望了她一下，不过什么也没说。
谢顿确信这位年轻的麦曲生人在根深蒂固的传统观念下，将拒绝承认听见一位女性对他说的话，于是又重复了一遍：“没关系，灰云，我们很高兴接待姐妹。”
他的表情立时豁然开朗：“我会让她们天亮之后马上来。”
当灰云离去后，谢顿带着几分满意说：“姐妹可能正是我们需要的。”
“真的？怎么说呢，哈里？”铎丝问。
“嗯，如果我们尊重她们，将她们当人看待，她们无疑将十分感激，一定肯说出麦曲生的传说。”
“要是她们知道的话。”铎丝以怀疑的口吻说，“我不太相信麦曲生的兄弟会好好教育他们的女人。”
Chapter 40
The Sisters arrived some six hours later after Seldon and Dors had slept some more, hoping to readjust their biological clocks. The Sisters entered the apartment shyly, almost on tiptoe. Their gowns (which, it turned out, were termed "kirtles" in the Mycogenian dialect) were soft velvety gray, each uniquely decorated by a subtle pattern of fine, darker gray webbing. The kirtles were not entirely unattractive, but they were certainly most efficient at covering up any human feature. And, of course, their heads were bald and their faces were devoid of any ornamentation. They darted speculative glances at the touch of blue at the corners of Dorss eyes and at the slight red stain at the corners of her lips. For a few moments, Seldon wondered how one could be certain that the Sisters were truly Sisters.
The answer came at once with the Sisters politely formal greetings. Both twittered and chirped. Seldon, remembering the grave tones of Sunmaster and the nervous baritone of Graycloud, suspected that women, in default of obvious sexual identification, were forced to cultivate distinctive voices and social mannerisms.
Im Raindrop Forty-Three," twittered one, "and this is my younger sister."
"Raindrop Forty-Five," chirped the other. "Were very strong on Raindrops in our cohort." She giggled.
"I am pleased to meet you both," said Dors gravely, "but now I must know how to address you. I cant just say Raindrop, can I?"
"No," said Raindrop Forty-Three. "You must use the full name if we are both here."
Seldon said, "How about just Forty-Three and Forty-Five, ladies?"
They both stole a quick glance at him, but said not a word.
Dors said softly, "Ill deal with them, Hari."
Seldon stepped back. Presumably, they were single young women and, very likely, they were not supposed to speak to men. The older one seemed the graver of the two and was perhaps the more puritanical. It was hard to tell from a few words and a quick glance, but he had the feeling and was willing to go by that.
Dors said, "The thing is, Sisters, that we tribespeople dont know how to use the kitchen."
"You mean you cant cook?" Raindrop Forty-Three looked shocked and censorious. Raindrop Forty-Five smothered a laugh. (Seldon decided that his initial estimate of the two was correct.)
Dors said, "I once had a kitchen of my own, but it wasnt like this one and I dont know what the foods are or how to prepare them."
"Its really quite simple," said Raindrop Forty-Five. "We can show you."
"Well make you a good nourishing lunch," said Raindrop Forty-Three. "Well make it for ... both of you." She hesitated before adding the final words. It clearly took an effort to acknowledge the existence of a man.
"If you dont mind," said Dors, "I would like to be in the kitchen with you and I would appreciate it if youd explain everything exactly. After all, Sisters, I cant expect you to come here three times a day to cook for us."
"We will show you everything," said Raindrop Forty-Three, nodding her head stiffly. "It may be difficult for a tribeswoman to learn, however. You wouldnt have the ... feeling for it."
"I shall try," said Dors with a pleasant smile. They disappeared into the kitchen.
Seldon stared after them and tried to work out the strategy he intended to use.
Microfarm
MYCOGEN-- ... The microfarms of Mycogen are legendary, though they survive today only in such oft-used similes as "rich as the microfarms of Mycogen" or "tasty as Mycogenian yeast." Such encomiums tend to intensify with time, to be sure, but Hari Seldon visited those microfarms in the course of The Flight and there are references in his memoirs that would tend to support the popular opinion ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第四十章
　　两位姐妹大约在六小时后来到。在此之前，谢顿与铎丝又睡了一觉，希望借此调整他们的生物钟。
两位姐妹羞答答地走进这间寓所，几乎是踮着脚尖走路。她们的长袍（原来在麦曲生的方言中，这种长袍称为“裰服”）是天鹅绒般柔和的灰色，装饰着具有精巧图案的深灰色精致滚边，每件的图案不尽相同。这些裰服并非真的不好看，但它们遮掩人体曲线的功能确实无与伦比。
此外，当然，她们两人也是光头，而且脸上没有任何化妆。她们看到铎丝眼角的淡蓝色眼影，以及唇上的淡红色唇膏，不禁频频投以好奇的眼光。
有好一阵子，谢顿都在纳闷：如何才能确定姐妹真是姐妹呢？
两位姐妹正式而礼貌的问候，立刻为他带来答案，两人的声音都既清脆又嘹亮。谢顿依然记得日主低沉的声调，以及灰云紧张兮兮的男中音，不禁怀疑在缺乏明显性别认同的情况下，女性不得不培养出独特的声音与社交礼仪。
“我叫雨点四三，”其中一位以清脆的声音说，“这是我的妹妹。”
“雨点四五，”另一位以嘹亮的声音说，“我们支族中有很多‘雨点’。”她格格笑了起来。
“很高兴见到你们两位。”铎丝以庄重的口吻说，“不过，我必须知道怎么称呼你们。我不能光说‘雨点’吧，对不对？”
“是，”雨点四三说，“如果我们同时在场，你就必须使用全名。”
谢顿说：“只用四三和四五如何，两位小姐？”
两人偷偷瞥了他一眼，但未作任何同答。
铎丝柔声说道：“让我来吧，哈里。”
谢顿退了几步。她们想必是单身少女，而且极可能不准与男性交淡。年长的那位似乎比较严肃，或许也较为清心寡欲。不过仅凭几句话与一个照面，实在很难判断，但他就是有这种感觉。
铎丝说：“事情是这样的，两位姐妹，我们外族人不懂如何使用这间厨房。”
“你的意思是你不会烹饪？”雨点四三看来难以置信又不敢苟同，雨点四五则强忍住笑。（谢顿认定他对两人的最初评估是正确的。）
铎丝说：“我以前也有一间自己的厨房，不过它和这间不一样。我也不知道这些食物是什么，更别提如何料理了。”
“这一点不难，”雨点四五说，“我们可以示范给你看。”
“我们会帮你做一顿美味营养的午餐，”雨点四三说，“我们会替你……你们两位准备。”她在补充最后半句前犹豫了一下，显然需要花费一番力气，才能表现出承认一名男性的存在。
“你们要是不介意，”铎丝说，“我希望能和你们一起待在厨房。假如你们愿意切实解释每样事物，那我将感激不尽。毕竟，两位姐妹，我不能指望你们一天三餐都来帮我们料理。”
“我们会一一为你示范。”雨点四三一面说，一而生硬地点着头。“然而外族女子学来或许不容易。你不会有……那种感觉。”
“我愿意试试看。”铎丝带着开心的笑容说。
然后她们便走入厨房。谢顿凝望着她们的背影，心中试图谋划出待会儿该使用的策略。
Chapter 41

"That was good." said Seldon explosively. "It was considerably better than the food Graycloud brought--"
Dors said reasonably, "You have to remember that Grayclouds woman had to prepare it on short notice in the middle of the night." She paused and said, "I wish they would say wife. They make woman sound like such an appanage, like my house or my robe. It is absolutely demeaning."
"I know. Its infuriating. But they might well make wife sound like an appanage as well. Its the way they live and the Sisters dont seem to mind. You and I arent going to change it by lecturing. Anyway, did you see how the Sisters did it?"
"Yes, I did and they made everything seem very simple. I doubted I could remember everything they did, but they insisted I wouldnt have to. I could get away with mere heating. I gathered the bread had some sort of microderivative added to it in the baking that both raised the dough and lent it that crunchy consistency and warm flavor. Just a hint of pepper, didnt you think?"
"I couldnt tell, but whatever it was, I didnt get enough. And the soup. Did you recognize any of the vegetables?"
"No."
"And what was the sliced meat? Could you tell?"
"I dont think it was sliced meat, actually. We did have a lamb dish back on Cinna that it reminded me of."
"It was certainly not lamb."
"I said that I doubted it was meat aaaall.--I dont think anyone outside Mycogen eats like this either. Not even the Emperor, Im sure. Whatever the Mycogenians sell is, Im willing to bet, near the bottom of the line. They save the best for themselves. We had better not stay here too long, Hari. If we get used to eating like this, well never be able to acclimatize ourselves to the miserable stuff they have outside." She laughed.
Seldon laughed too. He took another sip aaathe fruit juice, which tasted far more tantalizing than any fruit juice he had ever sipped before, and said, "listen, when Hummin took me to the University, we stopped at a roadside diner and had some food that was heavily yeasted. It tasted like-- No, never mind what it tasted like, but I wouldnt have thought it conceivable, then, that microfood could taste like this. I wish the Sisters were still here. It would have been polite to thank them."
"I think they were quite aware of how we would feel. I remarked on the wonderful smell while everything was warming and they said, quite complacently, that it would taste even better."
"The older one said that, I imagine."
"Yes. The younger one giggled.--And theyll be back. Theyre going to bring me a kirtle, so that I can go out to see the shops with them. And they made it clear I would have to wash my face if I was to be seen in public. They will show me where to buy some good-quality kirtles of my own and where I can buy ready-made meals of all kinds. All Ill have to do is heaaathem up. They explained that decent Sisters wouldnt do that, but would start from scratch. In fact, some of the meal they prepared for us was simply heated and they apologized for that. They managed to imply, though, that tribespeople couldnt be expected to appreciate true artistry in cooking, so that simply heating prepared food would do for us.--They seem to take it for granted, by the way, that I will be doing all the shopping and cooking."
"As we say at home, When in Trantor, do as the Trantorians do. "
"Yes, I was sure that would be your attitude in this case."
"Im only human," said Seldon.
"The usual excuse," said Dors with a small smile. Seldon leaned back with a satisfactory well-filled feeling and said, "Youve been on Trantor for two years, Dors, so you might understand a few things that I dont. Is it your opinion thaaathis odd social system the Mycogenians have is part of a supernaturalistic view they have?"
"Supernaturalistic?"
"Yes. Would you have heard that this was so?"
"What do you mean by supernaturalistic?"
"The obvious. A belief in entities that are independent of natural law, that are not bound by the conservation of energy, for instance, or by the existence of a constant of action."
"I see. Youre asking if Mycogen is a religious community."
It was Seldons turn. "Religious?"
"Yes. Its an archaic term, but we historians use it--our study is riddled with archaic terms. Religious is not precisely equivalent to supernaturalistic, though it contains richly supernaturalistic elements. I cant answer your specific question, however, because Ive never made any special investigation of Mycogen. Still, from what little Ive seen of the place and from my knowledge of religions in history, I wouldnt be surprised if the Mycogenian society was religious in character."
"In that case, would it surprise you if Mycogenian legends were also religious in character?"
"No, it wouldnt."
"And therefore not based on historical matter?"
"That wouldnt necessarily follow. The core of the legends might still be authentically historic, allowing for distortion and supernaturalistic intermixture."
"Ah," said Seldon and seemed to retire into his thoughts.
Finally Dors broke the silence that followed and said, "Its not so uncommon, you know. There is a considerable religious element on many worlds. Its grown stronger in the last few centuries as the Empire has grown more turbulent. On my world of Cinna, at least a quarter of the population is tritheistic."
Seldon was again painfully and regretfully conscious of his ignorance of history. He said, "Were there times in past history when religion was more prominent than it is today?"
"Certainly. In addition, there are new varieties springing up constantly. The Mycogenian religion, whatever it might be, could be relatively new and may be restricted to Mycogen itself. I couldnt really tell without considerable study."
"But now we get to the point of it, Dors. Is it your opinion that women are more apt to be religious than men are?"
Dors Venabili raised her eyebrows. "Im not sure if we can assume anything as simple as that." She thought a bit. "I suspect that those elements of a population that have a smaller stake in the material natural world are more apt to find solace in what you call supernaturalism--the poor, the disinherited, the downtrodden. Insofar as supernaturalism overlaps religion, they may also be more religious. There are obviously many exceptions in both directions. Many of the downtrodden may lack religion; many of the rich, powerful, and satisfied may possess it."
"But in Mycogen," said Seldon, "where the women seem to be treated as subhuman--would I be right in assuming they would be more religious than the men, more involved in the legends that the society has been preserving?"
"I wouldnt risk my life on it, Hari, but Id be willing to risk a weeks income on it."
"Good," said Seldon thoughtfully.
Dors smiled at him. "Theres a bit of your psychohistory, Hari. Rule number 47,854: The downtrodden are more religious than the satisfied."
Seldon shook his head. "Dont joke about psychohistory, Dors. You know Im not looking for tiny rules but for vast generalizations and for means of manipulation. I dont want comparative religiosity as the result of a hundred specific rules. I want something from which I can, after manipulation through some system of mathematicized logic, say, Aha, this group of people will tend to be more religious than that group, provided that the following criteria are met, and that, therefore, when humanity meets with these stimuli, it will react with these responses. "
"How horrible," said Dors. "You are picturing human beings as simple mechanical devices. Press this button and you will get that twitch."
"No, because there will be many buttons pushing simultaneously to varying degrees and eliciting so many responses of different sorts that overall the predictions of the future will be statistical in nature, so that the individual human being will remain a free agent."
"How can you know this?"
"I cant," said Seldon. "At least, I dont know it. I feel it to be so. It is what I consider to be the way things ought to be. If I can find the axioms, the fundamental Laws of Humanics, so to speak, and the necessary mathematical treatment, then I will have my psychohistory. I have proved that, in theory, this is possible--"
"But impractical, right?"
"I keep saying so."
A small smile curved Dorss lips, "Is that what you are doing, Hari, looking for some sort of solution to this problem?"
"I dont know. I swear to you I dont know. But Chetter Hummin is so anxious to find a solution and, for some reason, I am anxious to please him. He is so persuasive a man."
"Yes, I know."
Seldon let that comment pass, although a small frown flitted across his face. Seldon continued. "Hummin insists the Empire is decaying, that it will collapse, that psychohistory is the only hope for saving it--or cushioning it or ameliorating it--and that without it humanity will be destroyed or, at the very least, go through prolonged misery. He seems to place the responsibility for preventing that on me. Now, the Empire will certainly last my time, but if Im to live at ease, I must lift that responsibility from my shoulders. I must convince myself--and even convince Hummin--that psychohistory is not a practical way out that, despite theory, it cannot be developed. So I must follow up as many leads as I can and show that each one must fail."
"Leads? Like going back in history to a time when human society was smaller than it is now?"
"Much smaller. And far less complex."
"And showing that a solution is still impractical?"
"Yes."
"But who is going to describe the early world for you? If the Mycogenians have some coherent picture of the primordial Galaxy, Sunmaster certainly wont reveal it to a tribesman. No Mycogenian will. This is an ingrown society--how many times have we already said it?--and its members are suspicious of tribesmen to the point of paranoia. Theyll tell us nothing."
"I will have to think of a way to persuade some Mycogenians to talk. Those Sisters, for instance."
"They wont even hear you, male that you are, any more than Sunmaster hears me. And even if they do talk to you, what would they know but a few catch phrases?"
"I must start somewhere."
Dors said, "Well, let me think. Hummin says I must protect you and I interpret that as meaning I must help you when I can. What do I know about religion? Thats nowhere near my specialty, you know. I have always dealt with economic forces, rather than philosophic forces, but you cant split history into neat little nonoverlapping divisions. For instance, religions tend to accumulate wealth when successful and that eventually tends to distort the economic development of a society. There, incidentally, is one of the numerous rules of human history that youll have to derive from your basic Laws of Humanics or whatever you called them. But ..."
And here, Dorss voice faded away as she lapsed into thought. Seldon watched her cautiously and Dorss eyes glazed as though she was looking deep within herself.
Finally she said, "This is not an invariable rule, but it seems to me that on many occasions, a religion has a book--or books--of significance; books that give their ritual, their view of history, their sacred poetry, and who knows what else. Usually, those books are open to all and are a means of proselytization. Sometimes they are secret."
"Do you think Mycogen has books of that sort?"
"To be truthful," said Dors thoughtfully, "I have never heard of any. I might have if they existed openly--which means they either dont exist or are kept secret. In either case, it seems to me you are not going to see them."
"At least its a starting point," said Seldon grimly.
第四十一章
第九部 微生农场
麦曲生：……麦曲生的微生农场颇具传奇色彩，但它们如今仅见于一些比喻中，诸如“如同麦曲生微生农场那般丰饶”，“有如麦曲生酵母那般美味’。虽然这类赞美比喻容易随着时问而日趋夸张。
不过，“述亡期”的哈里•谢顿曾造访过这些微生农场，他回忆录中相关记载，倾向于支持这个公认的看法……
——《银河百科全书》


第四十一章
“真好吃！‘，谢顿爆发出一声赞叹，“比灰云带来的好得多……”
铎丝以中肯的态度说：“你别忘记灰云的女人是在半夜临时准备的。”她顿了一下，“我很希望他们会说‘妻子’。‘女人’听来像一种附属品，就像是‘我的房子’或‘我的袍子’一样，绝对是贬抑的称呼。”
“我知道，这的确令人气愤，但他们可能会让‘妻子’听来也像一种附属品。这是他们的生活方式，姐妹们似乎并不在意。你我犯不着对他们说教，要他们做任何改变——不管这些，你看到两位姐妹如何烹饪了吗？”
“看到了，她们已经尽量简化所有过程了。我怀疑自己是否记得她们听做的一切，可是她们坚持没这个必要，我只要会加热便能应付。我推测那些面包在烘焙过程中，曾经加入某种微生衍生物，不但让面团胀了起来．还使它带有爽脆的硬度和亲切的香味——是加了少许胡椒吧，对不对？”
“我无法判断，但不论是什么，我都觉得不够。还有这碗汤，你认得出里面任何一种蔬菜吗？”
“认不出来。”
“这些肉片又是什么，你能分辨吗？”
“其实，我认为它根本不是肉片，虽然它的确使我想起我们在锡纳时所吃的羔羊肉。”
“那绝不是羔羊肉。”
“我说过，我怀疑它根本不是肉类，我认为麦曲生以外的人都没吃过这种好东西——就连皇上也没有，我敢肯定。麦曲生人卖出去的那些，我愿意打赌，全是接近谷底的货色，他们把上好的留给自己享用。我们最好别在这里待太久，哈里。如果我们习惯了这种美食，就再也没法适应外头那些可怕的食物喽。”说完她笑了起来。
谢顿也笑了起来。他又呷了一口果汁，那味道比他以前喝过的任何果汁都醉人得多。“听我说，夫铭带我到大学去的时候，我们曾经停在一个路边快餐店，吃了一些添加浓重酵母的食物。味道好像——不，别管味道像什么，不过，当时我绝不会相信微生食品能有这种美味。我希望那两位姐妹还在这里，礼貌上应该向她们致谢。”
“我想她们相当清楚我们会有什么感受。当菜肴在加热的时候，我赞美着散发出的绝妙香气，她们却以相当自满口气说，吃起来味道会更好。”
“是年纪较大的那个说的吧，我猜想。”
“没错，年轻的那个只是格格地笑。她们还会再来，帮我带一套裰服，这样我就能跟她们出去逛街。她们讲得很明白，如果我想在公共场所出现，就必须把脸上的妆洗掉。她们会告诉我哪里能买到高质量的裰服，还有哪里能买到料理好的各种食品，我只要加热就可以。她们解释说，有教养的姐妹不会那样做，一定都会从头做起。事实上，她们为我们准备的食物，有些也不过是加热一下而已，她们还特地为此道歉。不过，她们的话中透露一项信息，那就是外族人绝无欣赏真正厨艺的品位。所以只要将料理包加热就能打发我们——对了，她们似乎认为，我理所当然会负责所有采购和烹饪的工作。”
“就像我们家乡的一句话：在川陀行，如川陀人。”
“是啊，我就知道你在这件事上会这么想。”
“我只是个凡人嘛。”谢顿说。
“老套的借口。”铎丝露出浅浅的微笑。
谢顿带着一种心满意足的充实感仰靠在椅背上：“你来川陀已经两年，铎丝，所以你或许了解一些我不了解的事。在你的见解中，麦曲生这种古怪的社会系统，是不是他们超自然宇宙观的一环？”
“超自然？”
“对，你有没有听人这么说过？”
“你所谓的超自然是什么意思？”
“就是字面上的意思，相信某些实体独立于自然律之外，比如说不受能量守恒或作用量常数存在的限制。”
“我懂了，你是问麦曲生是不是一个宗教性社会。”
这回轮到谢顿困惑不已：“宗教？”
“是的，这是个古老的词汇，不过我们历史学家常会用到它，我们的研究充满古老的词汇。‘宗教’不完全等同于‘超自然’，但它含有丰富的超自然成分。然而我还是无法回答你这个特定的问题，因为我从未对麦曲生做过任何特别研究。话说回来，根据我在此地的一点所见所闻，以及我对历史中宗教的认识，要是麦曲生社会具有宗教性本质，我也不会惊讶。”
“如果麦曲生的传说也具有宗教性本质呢，你会不会感到惊讶？”
“不，不会。”
“也就是说，那些传说都没有历史根据？”
“这倒不一定。传说的核心仍有可能是货真价实的历史，只不过遭到扭曲，并掺杂了超自然的成分。”
“啊。”谢顿听完之后，似乎陷入了沉思。
最后由铎丝打破沉默，她说：“这没什么不寻常，你知道吗，许多世界都有可观的宗教成分，过去几世纪以来，随着帝国越来越不稳固，宗教的势力越来越强。在我自己的世界锡纳，至少有四分之一的人是三神论信徒。”
谢顿再度察觉自己对历史的无知，因而深感痛苦与懊悔。他说：“在过去历史上，有比如今更盛行宗教的时期吗？”
“当然有。除此之外，还不断有新生的派别冒出来。不论麦曲生的宗教是什么，都有可能相当新颖，也或许局限于麦曲生地区。在没有进行深入研究之前，我无法做任何断言。”
“可是现在我们谈到了重点，铎丝。在你的见解中，女性是否比男性更具宗教倾向？”
铎丝•凡纳比里扬起眉毛：“我不确定我们是否可做这么简单的假设。”她稍微想了一下，“根据我的感觉，在自然物质世界中拥有较少本钱的成员，比较容易在你所谓的超自然论中找到慰藉。例如穷人、出身卑微者，以及遭受压迫的人。在超自然论和宗教重叠的部分，他们可能有更多的宗教情操。但两方面显然都有不少例外，许多受压迫者可能缺乏宗教信仰，许多有钱有势、生活安逸的人反而有。”
“可是在麦曲生，”谢顿说，“女性似乎被当成次等人类。如果我假设她们比男性更具宗教倾向，更笃信这个社会保存的传说，不知是否正确？”
“我不会拿我的生命打赌，哈里，不过我愿意押下一周的收入。”
“很好。”谢顿若有所思地说。
铎丝对他微微一笑：“你的心理史学又多了一点内容，哈里。法则第四七八五四条：受压迫者比生活安逸者容易接受宗教。”
谢顿摇了摇头：“别拿心理史学开玩笑，铎丝。你知道我不是在寻找细碎的法则，而是在寻找普遍的通则和运作方法。我不要一百种特殊法则导出的比较宗教学；我所要的东西，是借助某种数学化逻辑系统的运作，而后断言说：‘啊哈，只要下列判据全部符合，这群人就会比那群人更具宗教倾向。因此，当人类遇到这些刺激时，就会表现出这些反应来。”’“多可怕啊。”铎丝说，“你把人类看成简单的机械装置——只要按下这个钮，就得到那种反应。”
“并非如此，因为许多钮会依不同程度同时被按下，许许多多相异的反应将冈而引发，以致对未来的整体预测必将是统计性的，所以独立个体仍是自由因子。”
“你怎么能知道？”
“不，我不知道，”谢顿说，“至少，我并不确知。只是有这种感觉而已，我认为事情应该这样才对。如果我能找到一组公设，比如说管它叫人性学基本定律，再加上必要的数学运算方法，我就会得到我要的心理史学。我已经证明过，理论上是可能的……”
“但是不实际，是吗？”
“我一直都这样说。”
铎丝的嘴角露出一丝笑意：“这就是你正在做的吗，哈里，为这个问题寻找某种解答？”
“我不知道，我向你发誓我不知道。可是契特•夫铭如此渴望找到一个答案，而且，不知道为什么，我也渴望能满足他，他是如此具有说服力的人。”
“是的，我知道。”
谢顿没有深究这句话的意思，脸上却迅速掠过一丝愁容。
谢顿继续说：“夫铭坚持帝国正在衰败之中，说它终将崩溃，说想要拯救帝国，或是缓冲或改善这一点，心理史学将是唯一的希望。他又说若没有心理史学，人类将遭到毁灭，或至少会经历一段长久的悲惨岁月。他似乎将这个重大责任压在我的肩上。虽然在我有生之年，帝国绝对不会崩溃，但我若想心安理得地活下去，就必须把这个重担卸下来。我必须说服自己——甚至要说服夫铭——心理史学并非实际可行的方法，尽管有理论，却无法真正有所建树。所以我得尝试每条可能的途径，以证明没有任何一条活路。”
“途径？像是回溯历史，直到人类社会小于如今的时代？”
“小很多，而且简单得多。”
“然后证明实际上仍然无法找到解答。”
“没错。”
“可是谁来为你描述早期的世界呢？就算麦曲生人拥有太初银河的一些特征，日主也绝不可能向一个外族人透露，没有一个麦曲生人会那么做。这是个故步自封的社会——这点我们不知道已提过多少次——而它的成员对外族人的提防又已到歇斯底里的地步，他们什么也不会告诉我们。”
“我必须想个办法说服某些麦曲生人开口，比如说那两位姐妹。”
“她们甚至不会听到你的话，因为你是男性，就像日主对我装聋作哑一样。即使她们真的跟你说话，除了几句口号之外，她们还会知道什么呢？”
“我一定得从某处着手。”
铎丝说：“好吧，让我想想。夫铭说过我必须保护你，我将这解释为必须尽力帮助你。我对宗教知道多少呢？你可知道，那和我的专长相隔甚远。我研究的一向是经济力量，而不是那些哲学力量，可是，你无法将历史分割成许多毫不相交的小单元。举例而言，成功的宗教有积聚财富的倾向，到头来可能扭曲一个社会的经济发展。顺便提一下，这是人类历史的无数法则之一，你的人性学基本定律——无论你管它叫什么——必须能把它导出来。不过……”
说到这里，铎丝不知不觉陷入沉思，她的声音逐渐消失。谢顿仔细望着她，发现她的双眼显得呆滞无神，仿佛正在凝视自己内心深处。
最后她终于说：“这并非一条一成不变的法则，但我觉得在许多个案中，一种宗教都拥有一本或数本神圣的典籍，其中记载着他们的仪礼、他们的历史观、他们的圣诗，谁晓得还有些什么东西。通常这些典籍对所有人公开，被当做劝人皈依的一种工具。不过有此时候，也可能是不可示人的密典。”
“你认为麦曲生有这种典籍吗？”
“说老实话，”铎丝语重心长地说，“我从没听说过。如果它们是公开的典籍，我应该有所耳闻。这就代表它们要么不存在，要么就是一直被秘密收藏。不论何者为真，似乎你都无法得见。”
“至少这是一个起点。”谢顿绷着脸说。

Chapter 42

The Sisters returned about two hours after Hari and Dors had finished lunch. They were smiling, both of them, and Raindrop Forty-Three, the graver one, held up a gray kirtle for Dorss inspection.
"It is very attractive," said Dors, smiling widely and nodding her head with a certain sincerity. "I like the clever embroidery here."
"It is nothing," twittered Raindrop Forty-Five. "It is one of my old things and it wont fit very well, for you are taller than I am. But it will do for a while and we will take you out to the very best kirtlery to get a few that will fit you and your tastes perfectly. You will see."
Raindrop Forty-Three, smiling a little nervously but saying nothing and keeping her eyes fixed on the ground, handed a white kirtle to Dors. It was folded neatly. Dors did not attempt to unfold it, but passed it on to Seldon.
"From the color I should say its yours, Hari."
"Presumably," said Seldon, "but give it back. She did not give it to me."
"Oh, Hari," mouthed Dors, shaking her head slightly.
"No," said Seldon firmly. "She did not give it to me. Give it back to her and Ill wait for her to give it to me."
Dors hesitated, then made a half-hearted attempt to pass the kirtle back to Raindrop Forty-Three.
The Sister put her hands behind her back and moved away, all life seeming to drain from her face. Raindrop Forty-Five stole a glance at Seldon, a very quick one, then took a quick step toward Raindrop Forty-Three and put her arms about her.
Dors said, "Come, Hari, Im sure that Sisters are not permitted to talk to men who are not related to them. Whats the use of making her miserable? She cant help it."
"I dont believe it," said Seldon harshly. "If there is such a rule, it applies only to Brothers. I doubt very much that shes ever met a tribesman before."
Dors said to Raindrop Forty-Three in a soft voice, "Have you ever met a tribesman before, Sister, or a tribeswoman?"
A long hesitation and then a slow negative shake of the head.
Seldon threw out his arms. "Well, there you are. If there is a rule of silence, it applies only to the Brothers. Would they have sent these young women--these Sisters--to deal with us if there was any rule against speaking to tribesmen?"
"It might be, Hari, that they were meant to speak only to me and I to you."
"Nonsense. I dont believe it and I wont believe it. I am not merely a tribesman, I am an honored guest in Mycogen, asked to be treated as such by Chetter Hummin and escorted here by Sunmaster Fourteen himself. I will not be treated as though I do not exist. I will be in communication with Sunmaster Fourteen and I will complain bitterly."
Raindrop Forty-Five began to sob and Raindrop Forty-Three, retaining her comparative impassivity, nevertheless flushed faintly. Dors made as though to appeal to Seldon once again, but he stopped her with a brief and angry outward thrust of his right arm and then stared gloweringly at Raindrop Forty-Three.
And finally she spoke and did not twitter. Rather, her voice trembled hoarsely, as though she had to force it to sound in the direction of a male being and was doing so against all her instincts and desires. "You must not complain of us, tribesman. That would be unjust. You force me to break the custom of our people. What do you want of me?"
Seldon smiled disarmingly at once and held out his hand. "The garment you brought me. The kirtle."
Silently, she stretched out her arm and deposited the kirtle in his hand. He bowed slightly and said in a soft warm voice, "Thank you, Sister." He then cast a very brief look in Dorss direction, as though to say: You see? But Dors looked away angrily.
The kirtle was featureless, Seldon saw as he unfolded it (embroidery and decorativeness were for women, apparently), but it came with a tasseled belt that probably had some particular way of being worn. No doubt he could work it out.
He said, "Ill step into the bathroom and put this thing on. It wont take but a minute, I suppose."
He stepped into the small chamber and found the door would not close behind him because Dors was forcing her way in as well. Only when the two of them were in the bathroom together did the door close.
"What were you doing?" Dors hissed angrily. "You were an absolute brute, Hari. Why did you treat the poor woman that way?"
Seldon said impatiently, "I had to make her talk to me. Im counting on her for information. You know that. Im sorry I had to be cruel, but how else could I have broken down her inhibitions?" And he motioned her out.
When he emerged, he found Dors in her kirtle too. Dors, despite the bald head the skincap gave her and the inherent dowdiness of the kirtle, managed to look quite attractive. The stitching on the robe somehow suggested a figure without revealing it in the least. Her belt was wider than his own and was a slightly different shade of gray from her kirtle. Whats more, it was held in front by two glittering blue stone snaps. (Women did manage to beautify themselves even under the greatest difficulty, Seldon thought.)
Looking over at Hari, Dors said, "You look quite the Mycogenian now. The two of us are fit to be taken to the stores by the Sisters."
"Yes," said Seldon, "but afterward I want Raindrop Forty-Three to take me on a tour of the microfarms."
Raindrop Forty-Threes eyes widened and she took a rapid step backward.
"Id like to see them," said Seldon calmly.
Raindrop Forty-Three looked quickly at Dors. "Tribeswoman--"
Seldon said, "Perhaps you know nothing of the farms, Sister."
That seemed to touch a nerve. She lifted her chin haughtily as she still carefully addressed Dors. "I have worked on the microfarms. All Brothers and Sisters do at some point in their lives."
"Well then, take me on the tour," said Seldon, "and lets not go through the argument again. I am not a Brother to whom you are forbidden to speak and with whom you may have no dealings. I am a tribesman and an honored guest. I wear this skincap and this kirtle so as not to attract undue attention, but I am a scholar and while I am here I must learn. I cannot sit in this room and stare at the wall. I want to see the one thing you have that the rest of the Galaxy does not have ... your microfarms. I should think youd be proud to show them."
"We are proud," said Raindrop Forty-Three, finally facing Seldon as she spoke, "and I will show you and dont think you will learn any of our secrets if that is what you are after. I will show you the microfarms tomorrow morning. It will take time to arrange a tour."
Seldon said, "I will wait till tomorrow morning. But do you promise? Do I have your word of honor?"
Raindrop Forty-Three said with clear contempt, "I am a Sister and I will do as I say. I will keep my word, even to a tribesman." Her voice grew icy at the last words, while her eyes widened and seemed to glitter.
Seldon wondered what was passing through her mind and felt uneasy.
第四十二章
　　谢顿与铎丝用过午餐两小时之后，两位姐妹再度来访。两个人脸上都挂着微笑，较严肃的那位雨点四三拿着一件裰服让铎丝看。
“非常好看，”铎丝露出开怀的笑容，并以一种真诚的态度点着头，“我喜欢上面的精巧刺绣。”
“没有什么，”雨点四五以清脆的声音说，“它是我穿旧了的，而且不会很合身，因为你比我高，不过至少能凑合一下。我们会带你到最好的裰服店，买几件完全符合你的身材和品位的，到时你就知道了。”
然后，雨点四三露出于稍嫌紧张的微笑，什么话也没说，目光直直盯着地面，把一件白色裰服交给铎丝。那件裰服折叠得很整齐，铎丝并未直接打开，而是将它递给谢顿：“从它的颜色判断，我敢说是给你的，哈里。”
“想必没错，”谢顿说，“但我要你还回去，她没直接拿给我。”
“喔，哈里。”铎丝提高音渊，同时轻轻摇了摇头。
“不行，”谢顿坚决地说，“她没直接拿给我。把衣服还给她，我等她自已拿给我。”
铎筵迟疑了一下，然后勉强试着将那件裰服还给雨点四三。
那位姐妹却将双手背到背后，闪开身来，脸上的血色几乎完全消失。雨点四五迅速瞥了谢顿一眼，然后快步走向雨点四三，张开双臂将她抱住。
铎丝说：“好啦，哈里。我确定姐妹们不准和非亲非故的男性说话，你让她这么为难有什么用？她根本身不由已。”
“我不信。”谢顿粗暴地说，“如果有这样一条规定，它也只适用于兄弟们。我怀疑她根本没见过任何外族男子。”
铎丝以轻柔的声音对雨点四三说：“你遇见过外族男子，或是外族女子吗，姐妹？”
犹豫许久之后，她才慢慢摇了摇头。
谢顿摊开双臂：“好，你看吧。即使真有一条保持缄默的规定，它也只适用于兄弟们。要是有禁止和外族男子说活的任何规定，那他们还会派年轻女子——这两位姐妹——来帮我们吗？”
“或许是这样的，哈里，她们只打算和我讲话，再由我转达给你。”
“简直荒谬，我可不信，永远不会相信。我不只是一名外族男子，我还是麦曲生的贵客，契特•夫铭要求他们将我待为上宾，而且日主十四亲自护送我到此地。我不要被当成好像不存在，我会跟日主十四取得联络，还会跟他大吐苦水。”
雨点四五开始啜泣，雨点四三仍是一脸无动于衷的表情，但脸孔已微微涨红。
铎丝好像打算再向谢顿说情，他却愤怒地猛然伸出右臂，不让她开口。然后，他皱着眉头凝视着雨点四三。
最后她终于开口，但声音不再清脆嘹亮。反之，她的声音颤抖而嘶哑，仿佛她必须用力将声音传到一名男性所在的方向，而这样做完全违背她的本能与意愿。
“你不可以告我们的状，外族男子，那是不公平的。你强迫我打破我们族人的习俗，到底想要我怎么样？”
谢顿敌意尽消，立刻露出笑容，伸出一只手：“你带给我的那件衣服，那件裰服。”
她默默伸长手臂，将裰服放到他的手中。
他微一欠身，以温和、热诚的声音说：“谢谢你，姐妹。”然后他迅速望了铎丝一眼，仿佛在说：“你看如何？”铎丝却气呼呼地转过头去。
这件裰服平淡无奇，谢顿打开时便注意到这点（刺绣与装饰图样显然是女性的专利）。不过它附有一条缀着流苏的腰带，也许需要以特殊方式穿戴。毫无疑问，这绝对难不倒他。
他说：“我要进浴室去把这玩意穿上。要不了一分钟，我想。”
他走进狭小的浴室，发现无法将门关上，原来铎丝也挤了进来。直到他们两人都进入浴室，那扇门才关了起米。
“你在做什么？”铎丝气冲冲地细声说道，“你是不折不扣的野兽，哈里，你为何要那样对待这可怜的女子？”
谢顿不耐烦地说：“我必须让她跟我说话。我得靠她提供数据，这你是知道的。我很抱歉不得不这样残酷，可是除此之外，我如何能打破她的心理防线？”说完，他便示意要她出去。
当他走出来的时候，发现铎丝也换下了她的裰服。
虽然人皮帽使铎丝成了光头，而且裰服的样式有些邋遢，她看来仍然相当迷人。这种袍子的剪裁只能表现一个人形，无法衬托任何身形曲线。不过，她的腰带比他的宽些，而且正面固定的纽扣还是两颗闪闪发光的蓝石。（即使在最困难的情况下，女性仍能设法美化自己，谢顿想。
铎丝将谢顿打量一遍，然后说：“你现在看起来相当像麦曲生人，两位姐妹可以带我俩逛街了。”
“没错，”谢顿说，“可是逛完之后，我要雨点四三带我去参观微生农场。”
雨点四三将双眼睁得老大，猛然向后退了一步。
“我很希望去看看。”谢顿冷静地说。
雨点四三马上望着铎丝。“外族女子……”
谢顿说：“也许你对那些农场一无所知，姐妹。”
这句话似乎激怒了她。她高傲地抬起下巴，但仍然面对铎丝，以谨慎的态度说道：“我曾在微生农场工作，所有兄弟姐妹一生总有一段时间在那里工作。”
“好啊，那么带我参观一下，”谢顿说，“我们别再为这件事争论了。你不准和兄弟交谈，也不准和他们有任何来往，但我不是你们的兄弟。我是一名外族男子，也是一位贵客。我穿戴着人皮帽和这件裰服，以避免吸引太多的注意，但我是一名学者，我在此地这段期间必须继续学习。我不能坐在这个房间，对着墙壁干瞪眼。我要看看全银河只有你们才有的东西……你们的微生农场。我以为你一定会骄傲地带我去开眼界。”
“我们的确引以自豪，”雨点四三终于面对谢顿开口，“我会带你去开开眼界。你若想借此探知我们的任何秘密，我相信你绝对无法得逞。明天早上我带你参观微生农场，安排一次参观需要花点时间。”
谢顿说：“我愿意等到明天早上。可是你真的答应了吗？你能以名誉向我担保吗？”
雨点四三带着明显的轻蔑说道：“我是一名姐妹，我言出必行。我会说话算数——即使是对一名外族男子。”
她最后几个字的声音越来越冰冷，但她的眼睛睁得很大，而且似乎闪闪发光。
谢顿不禁怀疑有什么念头掠过她心底，令他感到一阵不安。
Chapter 43

Seldon passed a restless night. To begin with, Dors had announced that she must accompany him on the tour of the microfarm and he had objected strenuously. "The whole purpose," he said, "is to make her talk freely, to present her with an unusual environment--alone with a male, even if a tribesman. Having broken custom so far, it will be easier to break it further. If youre along, she will talk to you and I will only get the leavings."
"And if something happens to you in my absence, as it did Upperside?"
"Nothing will happen. Please! If you want to help me, stay away. If not, I will have nothing further to do with you. I mean it, Dors. This iiiimportant to me. Much as Ive grown fond of you, you cannot come ahead of this."
She agreed with enormous reluctance and said only, "Promise me youll at least be nice to her, then."
And Seldon said, "Is it me you must protect or her? I assure you that I didnt treat her harshly for pleasure and I wont do so in the future."
The memory of this argument with Dors--their first--helped keep him awake a large part of the night; that, together with the nagging thought that the two Sisters might not arrive in the morning, despite Raindrop Forty-Threes promise. They did arrive, however, not long after Seldon had completed a spare breakfast (he was determined not to grow fat through overindulgence) and had put on a kirtle that fitted him precisely. He had carefully organized the belt so that it hung perfectly.
Raindrop Forty-Three, still with a touch of ice in her eye, said, "if you are ready, Tribesman Seldon, my sister will remain with Tribeswoman Venabili." Her voice was neither twittery nor hoarse. It was as though she had steadied herself through the night, practicing, in her mind, how to speak to one who was a male but not a Brother.
Seldon wondered if she had lost sleep and said, "I am quite ready."
Together, half an hour later, Raindrop Forty-Three and Hari Seldon were descending level upon level. Though it was daytime by the clock, the light was dusky and dimmer than it had been elsewhere on Trantor. There was no obvious reason for this. Surely, the artificial daylight that slowly progressed around the Trantorian sphere could include the Mycogen Sector. The Mycogenians must want it that way, Seldon thought, clinging to some primitive habit. Slowly Seldons eyes adjusted to the dim surroundings. Seldon tried to meet the eyes of passersby, whether Brothers or Sisters, calmly. He assumed he and Raindrop Forty-Three would be taken as a Brother and his woman and that they would be given no notice as long as he did nothing to attract attention.
Unfortunately, it seemed as if Raindrop Forty-Three wanted to be noticed. She talked to him in few words and in low tones out of a clenched mouth. It was clear that the company of an unauthorized male, even though only she knew this fact, raved her self-confidence. Seldon was quite sure that if he asked her to relax, he would merely make her that much more uneasy. (Seldon wondered what she would do if she met someone who knew her. He felt more relaxed once they reached the lower levels, where human beings were fewer.)
The descent was not by elevators either, but by moving staired ramps that existed in pairs, one going up and one going down. Raindrop Forty-Three referred to them as "escalators." Seldon wasnt sure he had caught the word correctly, never having heard it before.
As they sank to lower and lower levels, Seldons apprehension grew. Most worlds possessed microfarms and most worlds produced their own varieties of microproducts. Seldon, back on Helicon, had occasionally shopped for seasonings in the microfarms and was always aware of an unpleasant stomach-turning stench. The people who worked at the microfarms didnt seem to mind. Even when casual visitors wrinkled their noses, they seemed to acclimate themselves to it. Seldon, however, was always peculiarly susceptible to the smell. He suffered and he expected to suffer now. He tried soothing himself with the thought that he was nobly sacrificing his comfort to his need for information, but that didnt keep his stomach from turning itself into knots in apprehension.
After he had lost track of the number of levels they had descended, with the air still seeming reasonably fresh, he asked, "When do we get to the microfarm levels?"
"Were there now."
Seldon breathed deeply. "It doesnt smell as though we are."
"Smell? What do you mean?" Raindrop Forty-Three was offended enough to speak quite loudly.
"There was always a putrid odor associated with microfarms, in my experience. You know, from the fertilizer that bacteria, yeast, fungi, and saprophytes generally need."
"In your experience?" Her voice lowered again. "Where was that?"
"On my home world."
The Sister twisted her face into wild repugnance. "And your people wallow in gabelle?"
Seldon had never heard the word before, but from the look and the intonation, he knew what it meant.
He said, "It doesnt smell like that, you understand, once it is ready for consumption."
"Ours doesnt smell like that aaaany time. Our biotechnicians have worked out perfect strains. The algae grow in the purest light and the most carefully balanced electrolyte solutions. The saprophytes are fed on beautifully combined organics. The formulas and recipes are something no tribespeople will ever know. Come on, here we are. Sniff all you want. Youll find nothing offensive. That is one reason why our food is in demand throughout the Galaxy and why the Emperor, we are told, eats nothing else, though it is far too good for a tribesman if you ask me, even if he calls himself Emperor." She said it with an anger that seemed directly aimed at Seldon. Then, as though afraid he might miss that, she added, "Or even if he calls himself an honored guest."
They stepped out into a narrow corridor, on each side of which were large thick glass tanks in which roiled cloudy green water full of swirling, growing algae, moving about through the force of the gas bubbles that streamed up through it. They would be rich in carbon dioxide, he decided. Rich, rosy light shone down into the tanks, light that was much brighter than that in the corridors. He commented thoughtfully on that.
"Of course," she said. "These algae work best at the red end of the spectrum."
"I presume," said Seldon, "that everything is automated."
She shrugged, but did not respond.
"I dont see quantities of Brothers and Sisters in evidence," Seldon said, persisting.
"Nevertheless, there is work to be done and they do it, even if you dont see them at work. The details are not for you. Dont waste your time by asking about it."
"Wait. Dont be angry with me. I dont expect to be told state secrets. Come on, dear." (The word slipped out.)
He took her arm as she seemed on the point of hurrying away. She remained in place, but he felt her shudder slightly and he released her in embarrassment. He said, "Its just that it seems automated."
"Make what you wish of the seeming. Nevertheless, there is room here for human brains and human judgment. Every Brother and Sister has occasion to work here at some time. Some make a profession of it."
She was speaking more freely now but, to his continuing embarrassment, he noticed her left hand move stealthily toward her right arm and gently rub the spot where he had touched her, as though he had stung her. "It goes on for kilometers and kilometers," she said, "but if we turn here therell he a portion of the fungal section you can see."
They moved along. Seldon noted how clean everything was. The glass sparkled. The tiled floor seemed moist, though when he seized a moment to bend and touch it, it wasnt. Nor was it slippery--unless his sandals (with his big toe protruding in approved Mycogenian fashion) had nonslip soles. Raindrop Forty-Three was right in one respect. Here and there a Brother or a Sister worked silently, studying gauges, adjusting controls, sometimes engaged in something as unskilled as polishing equipment--always absorbed in whatever they were doing.
Seldon was careful not to ask what they were doing, since he did not want to cause the Sister humiliation in having to answer that she did not know or anger in her having to remind him there were things he must not know. They passed through a lightly swinging door and Seldon suddenly noticed the faintest touch of the odor he remembered. He looked at Raindrop Forty-Three, but she seemed unconscious of it and soon he too became used to it. The character of the light changed suddenly. The rosiness was gone and the brightness too. All seemed to be in a twilight except where equipment was spotlighted and wherever there was a spotlight there seemed to be a Brother or a Sister. Some wore lighted headbands that gleamed with a pearly glow and, in the middle distance, Seldon could see, here and there, small sparks of light moving erratically.
As they walked, he cast a quick eye on her profile. It was all he could really judge by. At all other times, he could not cease being conscious of her bulging bald head, her bare eyes, her colorless face. They drowned her individuality and seemed to make her invisible. Here in profile, however, he could see something. Nose, chin, full lips, regularity, beauty. The dim light somehow smoothed out and softened the great upper desert.
He thought with surprise: She could be very beautiful if she grew her hair and arranged it nicely. And then he thought that she couldnt grow her hair. She would be bald her whole life. Why? Why did they have to do that to her? Sunmaster said it was so that a Mycogenian would know himself (or herself) for a Mycogenian all his (or her) life. Why was that so important that the curse of hairlessness had to be accepted as a badge or mark of identity?
And then, because he was used to arguing both sides in his mind, he thought: Custom is second nature. Be accustomed to a bald head, sufficiently accustomed, and hair on it would seem monstrous, would evoke nausea. He himself had shaved his face every morning, removing all the facial hair, uncomfortable at the merest stubble, and yet he did not think of his face as bald or as being in any way unnatural. Of course, he could grow his facial hair at any time he wished--but he didnt wish to do so.
He knew that there were worlds on which the men did not shave; in some, they did not even clip or shape the facial hair but let it grow wild. What would they say if they could see his own bald face, his own hairless chin, cheek, and lips? And meanwhile, he walked with Raindrop Forty-Three--endlessly, it seemed--and every once in a while she guided him by the elbow and it seemed to him that she had grown accustomed to that, for she did not withdraw her hand hastily. Sometimes it remained for nearly a minute.
She said, "Here! Come here!"
"What is that?" asked Seldon.
They were standing before a small tray filled with little spheres, each about two centimeters in diameter. A Brother who was tending the area and who had just placed the tray where it was looked up in mild inquiry.
Raindrop Forty-Three said to Seldon in a low voice, "Ask for a few."
Seldon realized she could not speak to a Brother until spoken to and said uncertainly, "May we have a few, B--brother?"
"Have a handful, Brother," said the other heartily.
Seldon plucked out one of the spheres and was on the point of handing it to Raindrop Forty-Three when he noticed that she had accepted the invitation as applying to herself and reached in for two handfuls. The sphere felt glossy, smooth. Seldon said to Raindrop Forty-Three as they moved away from the vat and from the Brother who was in attendance, "Are these supposed to be eaten?" He lifted the sphere cautiously to his nose.
"They dont smell," she said sharply.
"What are they?"
"Dainties. Raw dainties. For the outside market theyre flavored in different ways, but here in Mycogen we eat them unflavored--the only way." She put one in her mouth and said, "I never have enough."
Seldon put his sphere into his mouth and felt it dissolve and disappear rapidly. His mouth, for a moment, ran liquid and then it slid, almost of its own accord, down his throat.
He stood for a moment, amazed. It was slightly sweet and, for that matter, had an even fainter bitter aftertaste, but the main sensation eluded him. "May I have another?" he said.
"Have half a dozen," said Raindrop Forty-Three, holding out her hand. "They never have quite the same taste twice and have practically no calories. Just taste."
She was right. He tried to have the dainty linger in his mouth; he tried licking it carefully; tried biting off a piece. However, the most careful lick destroyed it. When a bit was crunched off apiece, the rest of it disappeared at once. And each taste was undefinable and not quite like the one before.
"The only trouble is," said the Sister happily, "that every once in a while you have a very unusual one and you never forget it, but you never have it again either. I had one when I was nine--" Her expression suddenly lost its excitement and she said, "Its a good thing. It teaches you the evanescence of things of the world."
It was a signal, Seldon thought. They had wandered about aimlessly long enough. She had grown used to him and was talking to him. And now the conversation had to come to its point. Now!
第四十三章
　　谢顿度过了不安的一夜。首先，铎丝宣称她一定要陪他参观微生农场，他则极力表示反对。
“整个行动的目的，”他说，“就是要让她自由自在地说话，让她处于一个不寻常的环境——和一名男性独处，即使是一名外族男子。习俗一旦被破除，就更容易被继续打破。如果你跟来，她会专门跟你讲话，而我只能捡些残汤剩菜。”
“万一因为我不在场，你又发生了什么变故，就像在穹顶上那次一样，那怎么办？”
“不会发生任何变故，拜托！如果你想帮我，就不要插手。如果你不肯，那我再也不要和你有任何瓜葛，我是说真的，铎丝。这件事对我很重要，虽然我越来越喜欢你，也不能把你放在它前面。”
她极不情愿地勉强答应，只说了一句：“那么，答应我至少你会善待她。”　谢顿说：“你保护的是我还是她？我向你保证，我并不是为了好玩才对她这么凶，而我以后再也不会那么做。”
想起与铎丝的这番争执——他们的第一次争执，他就大半夜无法成眠。雪上加霜的是——虽然雨点四三曾经当面保证，他还是一直担心两位姐妹明早可能爽约。
然而她们的确依约前来。当时谢顿刚吃完一顿简单的早餐（他决心不要因为沉溺于美食而发胖），穿上了那件十分合身的裰服。他曾经仔细调整那条腰带，将它固定在绝对正确的位置。
雨点四三的眼神还是有些冰冷，她说：“你准备好了吗，外族男子谢顿？我妹妹会留下来陪外族女子凡纳比里。”她的声音既不清脆也不嘶哑，仿佛她花了一夜的时间稳定情绪，并在心中练习如何与一位非兄弟的男性交淡。
谢顿怀疑她是否也曾失眠，他说：“我全都准备好了。”
半小时之后，雨点四三与哈里•谢顿两人开始一层一层往下走。虽然目前还是白昼，可是光线相当昏暗，比川陀其他各处都要暗淡。
这样做似乎没有明显的理由。不用说，缓缓绕行川陀表面的人工日光并未遗漏麦曲生区。但是为了固守某种原始的习惯，谢顿想，麦曲生人一定是故意这样做的。不久之后，谢顿的眼睛慢慢适应了幽暗的环境。
谢顿试着冷静地迎视路人的目光，不论是来自兄弟或姐妹的。他假定自己会被当做一名兄弟，而雨点四三则是他的女人，只要他不做出任何招摇的举动，就不会有人注意他们两个人。
只可惜，雨点四三似乎配合不上。她跟他的对话都只有儿个字，低沉的声音一律从紧闭的嘴巴发出来。显然，陪同一位关系暖昧的男性——即使只有她自己知道这个事实——也完全摧毁了她的自信。谢顿相当肯定，如果自己请她放松心情，只会使她变得加倍不安。（谢顿很想知道，如果她遇到熟人会有什么反应。直到他们来到较低的层绒，路人变得较少的时候，她似乎稍稍宽心。）
他们搭乘的并非升降机，而是一组成对的活动阶梯坡道，其中一个向上升，另一个向下降。雨点四三称之为“自动扶梯”，谢顿不确定有没有听错，但他从来未曾听过这个名称。
他们一层一层往下降，谢顿的焦虑却一点一点向上升。大多数世界都拥有微生农场，也都生产自家的各种各样微生作物。谢顿在赫利肯的时候，偶尔会到微生农场购买调味品，每次总会闻到一股令人反胃的恶臭。
在微生农场工作的人似乎行不在意，即使访客们皱起鼻子，他们自己却好像毫无感觉。然而谢顿一向对那种味道特别敏感。他以前总是受这种罪，这回也准备受同样的罪。他试图在心中安慰自己：他是因为必须寻找数据，才会作出这么伟大的牺牲。但这样想毫无用处，他的胃照样在焦虑中扭成一团。
等到他记不清下了多少层级，而空气似乎仍相当清新时，他忍不住问道：“我们何时才会到达微生农场的层级？”
“现在已经到了。”
谢顿深深吸了一口气。“闻起来不像我们到了。”
“闻起来？你是什么意思？”雨点四三十分气，嗓门突然变大不少。
“根据我的经验，微生农场总有一股腐败的臭味。你该知道，那是从细菌、酵母菌、真菌，以及腐生植物通常需要的肥料中散发出来的。”
“根据你的经验？”她的音量降低了，“那是在哪里？”
“在我的母星。”
这位姐妹将脸孔扭成厌恶至极的表情：“你的同胞偏爱吃渣食？”
谢顿从来没有听过那个词汇，不过根据她的表情与语气，他也能明白那是什么意思。
他说：“端上餐桌的时候，你该了解，就不再有那种味道了。”
“这里任何时候都没那种味道，我们的生物科技人员研发出完美的品系。藻类生长在最纯的光线和尽可能平衡的电解溶液中，腐生植物的养分是精心调配的有机物质。这些公式和配方是任何外族人都不会知道的——来吧，我们到了。你尽量闻吧，绝对闻不到任何异味。全银河都欢迎我们的食品，而且听说皇上绝不吃其他东西，这就是原因之一。但如果你问我，我会说外族人都不配吃那么好的食品，就算他自称皇帝也一样。”
她的话中带着一股怒气，矛头似乎直指谢顿。然后，她仿佛怕他没听出来，又补充了一句：“或者，就算他自称贵客也一样。”
他们来到一个狭窄的回廊，两侧都有许多大型、厚重的玻璃槽，浑浊的暗绿色溶液中满是团团转的藻类，受到上升气泡的推动而不断摇晃。他判断里面一定充满二氧化碳。
浓烈的蔷薇色光线照在这些玻璃槽上。这种光线比长廊中的照明强了许多，他若有所思地提到这点。
“当然。”她说，“这些藻类在光谱的红端长得最好。”
“我想，”谢顿说，“每样东西都是自动化的。”
她耸了耸肩，但未答腔。
“这附近的兄弟姐妹并不多。”谢顿毫不放松地说。
“即使如此，还是有工作要做，不管你看不看得到。细节不是给你看的，不要浪费时间问这些事。”
“等一等，别生我的气。我并不指望你透露什么国家机密。好啦，亲爱的。”（他一不小心说溜了嘴。）
就在她似乎要匆忙离去时，他及时抓住她的手臂。她留在原处，但他感到她在微微颤抖，遂在一阵尴尬中将手松开。
他说：“只不过在我看来一切都是自动的。”
“随便你爱怎样看都可以，然而这里仍有需要脑力和判断力的地方。每一位兄弟和姐妹，一生中总有一段时间在此工作，有些人还专职在此。”
现在她说话更为自在，但他注意到她的左手悄悄移向右臂，轻抚着刚才被他抓过的地方，仿佛他曾经刺了她一下，这点令他再度感到尴尬。
“它们绵延无数公里，”她说，“不过如果我们在这里转弯，你就可以看到一片真菌区。”
他们继续前进。谢顿注意到每样东西都清洁无比，连玻璃也晶莹剔透。瓷砖地板似乎是湿的，可是等他乘机弯腰摸了一下后，却发觉并非如此。而且地板也不滑——除非是他的凉鞋是很滑的鞋底（他将大脚趾伸在外面，这是麦曲生社会认可的行为）。
有一件事雨点四三的确没说错。不时可见兄弟或姐妹在默默工作，例如判读量计、调整控制装置，而有些人只是做着诸如擦拭设备这类毫无技术性的工作——不论做的是什么，每个人都全神贯注。
谢顿谨慎地没去问他们在做什么，他不想让这位姐妹因为不知道答案而感到羞愧；也不想让她因必须提醒他别打听不该知道的事而发脾气。
他们通过一扇微微晃动的门，谢顿突然察觉一丝记忆中的那种味道。他向雨点四三望去，但她似乎浑然不觉，而他自己也很快就习惯了。
光线的特征几乎瞬间改变。蔷薇的色调与明亮的感觉通通消失，除了各项设备有聚光光源照明外，四周似乎都笼罩在昏黄的光芒中。在每一个聚光处，好像都有一个兄弟或姐妹，他们有些戴着发出珍珠般光辉的头带。在不远的地方，谢顿看到四下都有细小的闪光不规则地运动着。
当两人并肩行走时，他朝她的侧面瞥了一眼，这是他能打量她的唯一角度。
在其他的时候，他总是无法摆脱她突出的光头、无眉的双眼，以及一张素净的脸庞。它们掩盖了她的个体性，似乎使她变得隐形。然而从现在这个角度，他却能看出一些别的：鼻子、下巴、丰唇、匀称、美丽，暗淡的光线好像使那个大沙漠不再那么显眼刺目。
他惊讶地想到：如果她留起头发，并且好好修剪整理，可能是个大美人。
然后他又想到，她无法长出头发，她这一生注定永远光头。
为什么呢？他们为什么一定要让她变成这样？日主说是为了使麦曲生人一辈子记得自己是麦曲生人。这点为何那么重要，以致大家不得不接受脱毛的诅咒，作为一种身份的象征与标记？
然后，由于他习惯从正反两面思考问题，因此又想到：习俗是第二天性，如果习惯光头，到了根深蒂固的地步，那么头发就会显得怪异恐怖，会令人感到恶心与厌恶。他自己每天早上都会刮脸，将面部毛发完全除去，即使剩下一点胡茬也不舒服。但他并不认为他的脸部是秃的，或是有任何不自然。当然，只要他愿意，随时都可以蓄起面部毛发，但他就是不愿那么做。
他知道在某些世界上，男人一律不刮脸，甚至有些世界的男人根本不修剪面部毛发，而是任由它胡乱生长。如果让他们看到自己光秃的脸庞、没有任何毛发的下巴、双颊与嘴唇，他们又会怎么说呢？
他一面想，一面跟着雨点四三向前走。这条路似乎没有尽头。每隔一会儿，她就会拉着他的手肘引导他：在他的感觉中，她似乎越来越习惯这样做，因为她不再急着缩回手去，有时这种情形甚至持续将近一分钟。
她说：“这里！到这里来！”
“那是什么？”谢顿问道。
他们面前有一个小盘子，里面装满了小型球体，每个球体直径差不多二厘米。　有位兄弟在照顾这一带，刚才就是他将盘子放在这里的。此时他抬起头来，带着和气的询问神情。
雨点四三对谢顿低声说：“向他要一些。”
谢顿明白她不能主动跟一位兄弟说话，除非对方先开口。于是他以迟疑的口气说：“我们能要一些吗，兄……兄弟？”
“拿一把吧，兄弟。”对方热诚地答道。
谢顿拿起一颗，正准备递给雨点四三，却发现她已将对方的话也解释为对她的邀请，已经伸手抓了两大把。
这种球体感觉上光滑柔润。当他们离开那个培养桶，以及照料该区的那位兄弟之后，谢顿对雨点四三说：“这些能吃吗？”他举起那个球体，小心翼翼地凑到鼻尖。
“它们只有味道。”她突然冒出一句。
“它们究竟是什么？”
“美食，未经加贵的美食。销到外界市场上的，都会经过各种方式的调味，可是在麦曲生，我们直接这么吃——唯一的吃法。”
她将一个放进嘴里，然后说：“我永远都吃不腻。”
谢顿将手上的球体放入嘴中，感觉它迅速溶化。一时之间，他嘴里出现一股流动的液体，然后它几乎自动滑进他的喉咙。
他停了一下脚步，感到相当惊讶。它有一点点甜味，后来甚至出现一丝更淡的苦味，但主要的感觉他却说不出来。
“我能再来一个吗？”他说。
“再来五六个，”雨点四三一面说，一面递过去，“没有一个口味是一样的，而且它们只有味道，完全不含热量。”
她说得没错。他试图让这种美食在口中多留一会儿；试图小心地舔着；试图只咬下一小口。然而不论他多么小心，它也禁不住轻轻一舔；而只要稍微咬下一点，其余部分也立刻无端消失。每个球体的味道都无以名状，而且都跟先前吃的不尽相同。
“唯一的问题是，”这位姐妹快活地说，“有些时候你会吃到一个非常特殊的口味，令你终身难忘，但是机会就只那么一次。我九岁的时候吃过一个……”她的兴奋表情突然消失无踪，“这是一件好事，让你体味到世事无常。”
这是一个信号，谢顿想。他们漫无目标地逛了许久，她已经开始习惯他，而且主动跟他说话。现在，他们一定要开始谈到重点。就是现在！
Chapter 44
Seldon said, "I come from a world which lies out in the open, Sister, as all worlds do but Trantor. Rain comes or doesnt come, the rivers trickle or are in flood, temperature is high or low. That means harvests are good or bad. Here, however, the environment is truly controlled. Harvests have no choice but to be good. How fortunate Mycogen is."
He waited. There were different possible answers and his course of action would depend on which answer came.
She was speaking quite freely now and seemed to have no inhibitions concerning his masculinity, so this long tour had served its purpose. Raindrop Forty-Three said, "The environment is not that easy to control. There are, occasionally, viral infections and there are sometimes unexpected and undesirable mutations. There are times when whole vast batches wither or are worthless."
"You astonish me. And what happens then?"
"There is usually no recourse but to destroy the spoiled batches, even those that are merely suspected of spoilage. Trays and tanks must be totally sterilized, sometimes disposed of altogether."
"It amounts to surgery, then," said Seldon. "You cut out the diseased tissue."
"Yes."
"And what do you do to prevent such things from happening?"
"What can we do? We test constantly for any mutations that may spring up, any new viruses that may appear, any accidental contamination or alteration of the environment. It rarely happens that we detect anything wrong, but if we do, we take drastic action. The result is that bad years are very few and even bad years affect only fractional bits here and there. The worst year weve ever had fell short of the average by only 12 percent--though that was enough to produce hardship. The trouble is that even the most careful forethought and the most cleverly designed computer programs cant always predict what is essentially unpredictable."
(Seldon felt an involuntary shudder go through him. It was as though she was speaking of psychohistory--but she was only speaking of the microfarm produce of a tiny fraction of humanity, while he himself was considering all the mighty Galactic Empire in every one of all its activities.) Unavoidably disheartened, he said, "Surely, its not all unpredictable. There are forces that guide and that care for us all."
The Sister stiffened. She turned around toward him, seeming to study him with her penetrating eyes. But all she said was "What?"
Seldon felt uneasy. "It seems to me that in speaking of viruses and mutations, were talking about the natural, about phenomena that are subject to natural law. That leaves out of account the supernatural, doesnt it? It leaves out that which is not subject to natural law and can, therefore, control natural law."
She continued to stare at him, as though he had suddenly begun speaking some distant, unknown dialect of Galactic Standard. Again she said, in half a whisper this time, "Wharf."
He continued, stumbling over unfamiliar words that half-embarrassed him. "You must appeal to some great essence, some great spirit, some ... I dont know what to call it."
Raindrop Forty-Three said in a voice that rose into higher registers but remained low, "I thought so. I thought that was what you meant, but I couldnt believe it. Youre accusing us of having religion. Why didnt you say so? Why didnt you use the word?"
She waited for an answer and Seldon, a little confused at the onslaught, said, "Because thats not a word I use. I call it supernaturalism. "
"Call it what you will. Its religion and we dont have it. Religion is for the tribesmen, for the swarming ho--"
The Sister paused to swallow as though she had come near to choking and Seldon was certain the word she had choked over was--"
She was in control again. Speaking slowly and somewhat below her normal soprano, she said, "We are not a religious people. Our kingdom is of this Galaxy and always has been. If you have a religion--"
Seldon felt trapped. Somehow he had not counted on this. He raised a hand defensively. "Not really. Im a mathematician and my kingdom is also of this Galaxy. Its just that I thought, from the rigidity of your customs, that your kingdom--"
"Dont think it, tribesman. If our customs are rigid, it is because we are mere millions surrounded by billions. Somehow we must mark ourselves off so that we precious few are not lost among your swarms and hordes. We must be marked off by our hairlessness, our clothing, our behavior, our way of life. We must know who we are and we must be sure that you tribesmen know who we are. We labor in our farms so that we can make ourselves valuable in your eyes and thus make certain that you leave us alone. Thats all we ask of you ... to leave us alone."
"I have no intention of harming you or any of your people. I seek only knowledge, here as everywhere."
"So you insult us by asking about our religion, as though we have ever called on a mysterious, insubstantial spirit to do for us what we cannot do for ourselves."
"There are many people, many worlds who believe in supernaturalism in one form or another ... religion, if you like the word better. We may disagree with them in one way or another, but we are as likely to be wrong in our disbelief as they in their belief. In any case, there is no disgrace in such belief and my questions were not intended as insults."
But she was not reconciled. "Religion!" she said angrily. "We have no need of it."
Seldons spirits, having sunk steadily in the course of this exchange, reached bottom. This whole thing, this expedition with Raindrop Forty-Three, had come to nothing.
But she went on to say, "We have something far better. We have history."
And Seldons feelings rebounded at once and he smiled.
Book
HAND-ON-THIGH STORY-- ... An occasion cited by Hari Seldon as the first turning point in his search for a method to develop psychohistory. Unfortunately, his published writings give no indication as to what that "story" was and speculations concerning it (there have been many) are futile. It remains one of the many intriguing mysteries concerning Seldons career.
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第四十四章
　　谢顿说：“我来自一个露天的世界，姐妹，除了川陀之外，其他世界也都是那样。雨水时有时无；河水不是太少就是泛滥；温度不是太高就是太低，这就代表收成有好有坏。然而在此地，环境完全受到控制，收成想不好也不行。麦曲生多么幸运啊。”
他开始等待。她的回答有各种可能，而他的行动方针将视她如何回答而定。
现在她说话的态度已经相当自在，而且似乎对他这位男性不再有任何提防，所以这趟长途旅程的目的业已达到。
雨点四三说：“环境也不是那么容易控制，偶尔会有病毒感染，有时也会有意料之外的不良突变。还有一些时候，大批作物会整个枯萎或变得毫无价值。”
“真令人难以置信，遇到这种情况你们会怎么处理？”
“通常都没什么办法，只能将腐坏的部分尽数销毁，甚至包括那些只是有可能腐坏的。盘子和水槽一定要完全消毒，有时必须全部丢弃。”
“那么，这等于是一种外科手术，”谢顿说，“将染病的组织切除。”
“没错。”
“你们如何预防这些情况发生？”
“我们能怎么办？我们不停地进行测试，看看有没有可能发生突变，有没有可能出现新的病毒，有没有意外的污染或环境的变化。我们很少会探测到什么问题，不过一旦发现了，我们就立即采取非常措施。如此一来，歉收的年份很少，而且即使歉收，也只是对部分地区稍有影响。历史上收成最差的一年，只比平均年产量少了百分之十二，不过那还是足以造成困扰。问题是，即使是最周密的深谋远虑，以及设计得最高明的计算机程序，也无法百分之百预测本质上不可预测的事物。”
（谢顿觉得一阵战栗小由自主传遍全身，因为她说的仿佛就是心理史学——事实上，她不过是在说极少数人所经营的微生农场。而他自己，却是从各个角度在考虑这个庞大的银河帝国。）
这使他无可避免地感到气馁，他说：“当然，并非全然不可预测，有些力量在引导、在照顾我们大家。”
雨点四三突然僵住。她转头望向谢顿，炯炯目光似乎想要将他穿透。
但她只是说：“什么？”
谢顿觉得坐立不安：“在我的感觉中，谈到病毒和突变这些话题时，我们只是在讨论自然界的事物，讨论服从自然律的各种现象。我们并未考虑到超自然，对不对？并没有包括不受制于自然律，进而能控制自然律的力量。”
她继续盯着他，仿佛他突然改说某种陌生的、不为人知的银河标准语方言。她又说了一句：“什么？”这次的音量近乎耳语。
他结结巴巴地用一些自己不太熟悉，以致令他有几分尴尬的词汇说：“你们必须求助某种伟大的本体，某种伟大的圣灵，某种……我不知道该管它叫什么。”
雨点四三的音调陡地拔高，但是音量仍旧压得很低：“我就知道，我就知道你是那个意思，可是我本来不敢相信。你是在指控我们拥有宗教。你为什么不那么说？为什么不用那个词汇？”
她在等待一个答案。谢顿被她一顿抢白弄得有点不知所措，他说：“因为那不是我使用的词汇，我管它叫超自然论。”
“随便你怎么称呼，那就是宗教，我们没有这种东西。宗教是外族人才有的，是那群渣……”
这位姐妹突然住口，吞了一下口水，仿佛差点就要呛死。谢顿可以确定，将她呛到的那个词一定是“渣滓”。
她再度恢复自制，以低于她平常的女高音音调缓缓说道“我们不是一个信仰宗教的民族，我们的国度是这个银河，而且一向如此。如果你信仰宗教……”
谢顿感到自己被困住了，他完全没料到会有这种情形。他举起一只手，做出辩解的手势：“不是这样的。我是个数学家，我的国度也是这个银河。只不过我根据你们那些刻板的习俗，猜想你们的国度……”
“别那样想，外族男子。如果我们的习俗刻板，那是因为我们只有几百万人，被四周几十亿人包围起来。我们总得设法表现得与众不同，这样一来，我们这些珍贵的少数，才不会被你们满坑满谷的多数吞没。我们必须靠我们的脱毛、我们的衣着、我们的行为、我们的生活方式来和他人区隔。我们必须知道自己是什么人，也必须确保你们外族人知道我们是什么人。我们在农场中辛勤工作，好让你们对我们刮目相看，这样才能确保你们放我们一马。这就是我们对你们唯一的要求——放我们一马。”
“我没有伤害你或是你们任何族人的意图。我只是来这里寻求知识，就像在其他地方一样。”
“你却借着询问我们的宗教来侮辱我们，仿佛我们曾经仰赖一种神秘、虚无的圣灵，帮助我们做到自己无法做到的事。”
“有许多人、许多世界都相信某种形式的超自然论或者蜕——宗教，如果你比较喜欢这个词的话。我们或许会因为某种理由而不同意他们的见解，但我们的不同意也有可能是个错误，双方犯错的机率刚好一半一半。无论如何，信仰没什么可耻，我的问题也不是打算侮辱任何人。”
可是她没有妥协的意思：“宗教！”她气呼呼地说，“我们根本不需要。”
在这段对话中，谢顿的心不断往下沉，此时已经跌到谷底。整件事情，与雨点四三的这趟远征，最后竟然一无所获。
不料她又继续开口说：“我们另有好得多的东西，我们有历史。”
谢顿的情绪立刻上扬，露出了微笑。
Chapter 45

Raindrop Forty-Three stared at Seldon, wild-eyed and breathing heavily. "I cant stay here," she said.
Seldon looked about. "No one is bothering us. Even the Brother from whom we got the dainties said nothing about us. He seemed to take us as a perfectly normal pair."
"Thats because there is nothing unusual about us--when the light is dim, when you keep your voice low so the tribesman accent is less noticeable, and when I seem calm. But now--" Her voice was growing hoarse.
"What of now?"
"I am nervous and tense. I am ... in a perspiration."
"Who is to notice? Relax. Calm down."
"I cant relax here. I cant calm down while I may be noticed."
"Where are we to go, then?"
"There are little sheds for resting. I have worked here. I know about them."
She was walking rapidly now and Seldon followed. Up a small ramp, which he would not have noticed in the twilight without her, there was a line of doors, well spread apart.
"The one at the end," she muttered. "If its free."
It was unoccupied. A small glowing rectangle said NOT IN USE and the door was ajar.
Raindrop Forty-Three looked about rapidly, motioned Seldon in, then stepped inside herself. She closed the door and, as she did so, a small ceiling light brightened the interior.
Seldon said, "Is there any way the sign on the door can indicate this shed is in use?"
"That happened automatically when the door closed and the light went on," said the Sister.
Seldon could feel air softly circulating with a small sighing sound, but where on Trantor was that ever-present sound and feel not apparent? The room was not large, but it had a cot with a firm, efficient mattress, and what were obviously clean sheets. There was a chair and table, a small refrigerator, and something that looked like an enclosed hot plate, probably a tiny food-heater.
Raindrop Forty-Three sat down on the chair, sitting stiffly upright, visibly attempting to force herself into relaxation.
Seldon, uncertain as to what he ought to do, remained standing till she gestured--a bit impatiently--for him to sit on the cot. He did so.
Raindrop Forty-Three said softly, as though talking to herself, "If it is ever known that I have been here with a man--even if only a tribesman--I shall indeed be an outcast."
Seldon rose quickly. "Then lets not stay here."
"Sit down. I cant go out when Im in this mood. Youve been asking about religion. What are you after?"
It seemed to Seldon that she had changed completely. Gone was the passivity, the subservience. There was none of the shyness, the backwardness in the presence of a male. She was glaring at him through narrowed eyes.
"I told you. Knowledge. Im a scholar. It is my profession and my desire to know, I want to understand people in particular, so I want to learn history. For many worlds, the ancient historical records--the truly ancient historical records--have decayed into myths and legends, often becoming part of a set of religious beliefs or of supernaturalism. But if Mycogen does not have a religion, then--"
"I said we have history."
Seldon said, "Twice youve said you have history. How old?"
"It goes back twenty thousand years."
"Truly? Let us speak frankly. Is it real history or is it something that has degenerated into legend?"
"It is real history, of course."
Seldon was on the point of asking how she could tell, but thought better of it. Was there really a chance that history might reach back twenty thousand years and be authentic? He was not a historian himself, so he would have to check with Dors.
But it seemed so likely to him that on every world the earliest histories were medleys of self-serving heroisms and minidramas that were meant as morality plays and were not to be taken literally. It was surely true of Helicon, yet you would find scarcely a Heliconian who would not swear by all the tales told and insist it was all true history. They would support, as such, even that perfectly ridiculous tale of the first exploration of Helicon and the encounters with large and dangerous flying reptiles--even though nothing like flying reptiles had been found to be native to any world explored and settled by human beings.
He said instead, "How does this history begin?"
There was a faraway look in the Sisters eyes, a look that did not focus on Seldon or on anything in the room. She said, "It begins with a world--our world. One world."
"One world?" (Seldon remembered that Hummin had spoken of legends of a single, original world of humanity.)
"One world. There were others later, but ours was the first. One world, with space, with open air, with room for everyone, with fertile fields, with friendly homes, with warm people. For thousands of years we lived there and then we had to leave and skulk in one place or another until some of us found a corner of Trantor where we learned to grow food that brought us a little freedom. And here in Mycogen, we now have our own ways--and our own dreams."
"And your histories give the full details concerning the original world? The one world?"
"Oh yes, it is all in a book and we all have it. Every one of us. We carry it at all times so that there is never a moment when any one of us cannot open it and read it and remember who we are and who we were and resolve that someday we will have our world back."
"Do you know where this world is and who lives on it now?"
Raindrop Forty-Three hesitated, then shook her head fiercely. "We do not, but someday we will find it."
"And you have this book in your possession now?"
"Of course."
"May I see that book?"
Now a slow smile crossed the face of the Sister. She said, "So thats what you want. I knew you wanted something when you asked to be guided through the microfarms by me alone." She seemed a little embarrassed. "I didnt think it was the Book."
"It is all I want," said Seldon earnestly. "I really did not have my mind on anything else. If you brought me here because you thought--"
She did not allow him to finish. "But here we are. Do you or dont you want the Book?"
"Are you offering to let me see it?"
"On one condition."
Seldon paused, weighing the possibility of serious trouble if he had overcome the Sisters inhibitions to a greater extent than he had ever intended. "What condition?" he said.
Raindrop Forty-Threes tongue emerged lightly and licked quickly at her lips. Then she said with a distinct tremor in her voice, "That you remove your skincap."
第四十五章
第十部 典籍
毛手毛脚的故事：……哈里•谢顿曾经提到，这是他找寻心理史学发展方法中的第一个转折点。
不幸的是，他所发表的著作皆未指出那究竟是什么“故事”，各种臆测（为数众多）则全是捕风捉影。它一直是有关谢顿生平许多有趣的谜之一。
——《银河百科全书）


第四十五章
雨点四三瞪着谢顿，眼睛睁得老大，呼吸十分沉重。
“我不能留在这里。”她说。
谢顿四下望了望。“没有人会打扰我们，就连那个给我们美食的兄弟也没说我们什么，他似乎将我们当成一对完全普通的夫妻。”
“那是因为我们没有任何不寻常的地方——当时光线暗淡；当时你压低声音使外族口音不太明显；还有当时我表现得很冷静。可是现在……”她的声音开始变得嘶哑。
“现在怎么样？”
“我既焦虑又紧张，我在……流汗。”
“谁会注意到呢？放轻松，冷静下来。”
“我在这罩不能放轻松。当我可能引起注意时，我无法冷静下来。”
“那么，我们能到哪儿去？”
“附近有些供人休憩的小屋。我曾在这里工作，我知道。”
她快步向前走，谢顿紧跟在后。他们爬上一个小坡道，若是没有她带路，在昏黄的光线下，他不可能会注意到这条小路。在坡道之上，有一长列相互间隔很远的门。
“最后那一间，”她低声说道，“如果没人的话。”
那间果然是空的。一个发亮的矩形小板映出“无人使用”几个字，而且门只是微掩着。
雨点四三迅速四下张望，示意谢顿进去，接着自己也走了进来。当她关上门的时候，屋顶的一盏小灯瞬即照亮斗室。
谢顿说：“有没有办法让门上标志显示有人使用这间小屋？”
“门一关上灯就会亮，标志也会自动切换。”雨点四三说。
谢顿可以感到空气在轻柔地循环，还带着一种微弱的风声。然而在川陀上，哪里又听不到、觉不着这种永不止息的声音呢？
这个房间并不大，却摆了一张具有硬实床垫的便床，上面的床单显然相当清洁。此外还有一把椅子、一张桌子、一台小型冰箱，以及看来像是密封热板的东西，那或许是个小型食物加热器。
雨点四三坐到椅子上，将上身挺得笔直，显然在企图强迫自己放松。
谢顿不知道该坐哪里，只好继续站着。直到她有点不耐烦地做了个手势，他才顺从地坐到便床上。
雨点四三仿佛自言自语般轻声说道：“如果有人知道我曾和一名男子关在这里．即使只是个外族男子，我也注定将被驱逐出境。”
谢顿急忙站起来：“那我们别待在这里。”
“坐下，我在这种心情之下不能出去。刚才你一直在问有关宗教的事，你究竟在找什么？”
谢顿觉得她完全变了一个人，被动与顺从都已消失无踪。面对一名男性她不再害羞，也不再畏缩不前。此时，她正眯起眼睛瞪着他。
“我告诉过你，我寻找的是知识。我是一名学者，追求知识是我的专业和渴望。我尤其想要了解人，所以我想学习历史。在许多世界上，古代历史记录——真正的古代历史记录，都已变质为神话和传说，多半成了宗教信仰或超自然论的一部分。但麦曲生如果没有宗教，那么……”
“我说过我们有历史。”
谢顿说：“你说了两次你们拥有历史，它有多古老？”
“上溯至两万年前。”
“真的吗？让我们坦白说吧，它究竟是真实的历史，还是已经退化成传说的东西？”
“当然是真实的历史。”
谢顿正想问她如何能判断，却临时打消了这个念头。历史真有可能上溯两万年而仍旧真实可信吗？他自己不是历史学家，所以必须问问铎丝。
可是他有一种强烈的感觉，那就是在每个世界上，最早期的历史都是一堆大杂烩，充满了说教式的英雄事迹与迷你剧本，只可视为一种道德剧，不能太过当真。赫利肯的情形当然如此，但你很难找到一个不深信那些传说、不坚持它们全是真实历史的赫利肯人。他们就连完全荒诞的故事照样深信不误，例如人类在首次探勘赫利肯时，遇到危险的巨型飞行爬虫——虽然在人类曾探勘与殖民的所有世界上，都从未发现任何土生土长的、类似飞行爬虫的动物。
不过他只是问：“这个历史是如何开始的？”
雨点四三双眼露出恍惚的目光，并未聚焦在谢顿或小屋中任何一样东西上。她说：“它开始于某个世界，我们的世界，唯一的世界。”
“唯一的世界？”（谢顿想起夫铭提过有关人类起源于单一世界的传说。）
“唯一的世界。后来又有了其他世界，但我们的世界是第一个。唯一的世界，上面有生存的空间，有露天的空气，万物皆享有一席之地，有肥沃的田园，有友善的人家，有热情的人们。前后数千年的时间，我们一直住在那里，后来我们不得不离开，开始四处东躲西藏，直到一些人在川陀的一角找到容身之地。我们在此学会栽种食粮，为我们带来了一点自由。而在麦曲生这里，我们现在拥有自己的生活方式——以及我们自己的梦想。”
“你们的历史详细记载了那个起源世界？那个唯一的世界？”
“喔，没错，全部记在一本书里。这本书大家都有，我们每一个人都有。我们随时随地随身携带，这样一来，任何人时时刻刻都能翻阅，以便牢记我们现在是什么人、过去是什么人，并且下定决心，总有一天会收复我们的世界。”
“你知道这个世界在哪里，现在上面住着什么人吗？”
雨点四三迟疑了一下，然后猛力摇了摇头：“我们不知道，但总有一天我们会找到答案。”
“你现在就带着这本书吗？”
“当然。”
“我可以看看吗？”
雨点四三的脸上缓缓掠过一阵笑容：“所以那就是你要的，”她说，“当你要求由我独自带你参观微生农场时，我就知道你在打什么东西的主意。”她似乎有点尴尬，“但我没想到是为了这本典籍：”
“这是我唯一想要的，”谢顿一本正经地说，“我心里真的没打别的主意。如果你带我到这里来，是由于你以为……”
她没让他把话说完：“可是我们已经来到这里，你到底是想还是不想要这本典籍？”
“你愿意让我看吗？”
“有一个条件。”
谢顿愣了一下。若是自己将这位姐妹的心理防线解除得过了头，他就得衡量导致严重后果的可能性。“什么条件？”他问。
雨点四三将舌头轻轻伸出来，迅速舔了一下嘴唇。然后，她以带着明显战粟的声音说：“你得脱掉你的人皮帽。”

Chapter 46

Hari Seldon stared blankly at Raindrop Forty-Three. There was a perceptible moment in which he did not know what she was talking about. He had forgotten he was wearing a skincap.
Then he put his hand to his head and, for the first time, consciously felt the skincap he was wearing. It was smooth, but he felt the tiny resilience of the hair beneath. Not much. His hair, after all, was fine and without much body. He said, still feeling it, "Why?"
She said, "Because I want you to. Because thats the condition if you want to see the Book."
He said, "Well, if you really want me to." His hand probed for the edge, so that he could peel it off.
But she said, "No, let me do it. Ill do it." She was looking at him hungrily.
Seldon dropped his hands to his lap. "Go ahead, then."
The Sister rose quickly and sat down next to him on the cot. Slowly, carefully, she detached the skincap from his head just in front of his ear. Again she licked her lips and she was panting as she loosened the skincap about his forehead and turned it up. Then it came away and was gone and Seldons hair, released, seemed to stir a bit in glad freedom.
He said, troubled, "Keeping my hair under the skincap has probably made my scalp sweat. If so, my hair will be rather damp."
He raised his hand, as though to check the matter, but she caught it and held it back. "I want to do that," she said. "Its part of the condition." Her fingers, slowly and hesitantly, touched his hair and then withdrew. She touched it again and, very gently, stroked it. "Its dry," she said. "It feels ... good."
"Have you ever felt cephalic hair before?"
"Only on children sometimes. This ... is different." She was stroking again.
"In what way?" Seldon, even amid his embarrassment, found it possible to be curious.
"I cant say. Its just ... different."
After a while he said, "Have you had enough?"
"No. Dont rush me. Can you make it lie anyway you want it to?"
"Not really. It has a natural way of falling, but I need a comb for that and I dont have one with me."
"A comb?"
"An object with prongs ... uh, like a fork ... but the prongs are more numerous and somewhat softer."
"Can you use your fingers?" She was running hers through his hair.
He said, "After a fashion. It doesnt work very well."
"Its bristly behind."
"The hair is shorter there."
Raindrop Forty-Three seemed to recall something. "The eyebrows," she said. "Isnt that what theyre called?" She stripped off the shields, then ran her fingers through the gentle arc of hair, against the grain. "Thats nice," she said, then laughed in a high-pitched way that was almost like her younger sisters giggle. "Theyre cute."
Seldon said a little impatiently, "Is there anything else thats part of the condition?"
In the rather dim light, Raindrop Forty-Three looked as though she might be considering an affirmative, but said nothing. Instead, she suddenly withdrew her hands and lifted them to her nose. Seldon wondered what she might be smelling. "How odd," she said. "May I ... may I do it again another time?"
Seldon said uneasily, "If you will let me have the Book long enough to study it, then perhaps."
Raindrop Forty-Three reached into her kirtle through a slit that Seldon had not noticed before and, from some hidden inner pocket, removed a book bound in some tough, flexible material. He took it, trying to control his excitement. While Seldon readjusted his skincap to cover his hair, Raindrop Forty-Three raised her hands to her nose again and then, gently and quickly, licked one finger.
第四十六章
　　哈里•谢顿茫然地凝视着雨点四三。有好一会儿，他根本不明白她究竟在说什么，因为他忘记自己戴着一顶人皮帽。
然后，他将一只手放到头上，才意识到自己戴着那顶帽子。它的表面光滑，但他能感觉到下面头发产生的轻微弹性。那并不太明显，毕竟他的发质纤细，而且不怎么浓密。
他一面摸着头，一面说：“为什么？”
“因为我要你这么做；因为如果你想看典籍，这就是交换条件。”
他说：“好吧，如果你真要我这么做。”他开始动手摸索帽缘，准备将人皮帽剥掉。
但她却说：“不，让我来，我来帮你脱。”她以渴盼的眼神望着他。
谢顿将双手放在膝盖上：“那就来吧。”
这位姐妹迅速起身，跟他并排坐到便床上。她慢慢地、仔细地将他耳前的人皮帽撕开，同时又舔了舔嘴唇。当她将他的前额部分弄松，并将人皮帽向上掀的时候，她开始大口喘气。然后人皮帽便被摘下，谢顿的头发在解除束缚之后，似乎因为欣庆而微微抖动了一下。
他不安地说道：“我的头发一直闷在人皮帽下面，也许会使我的头皮出汗。要是这样的话，我的头发就会有点潮湿。”
他举起一只手，好像是要检查一下。她却将他的手抓住，并且将它拉开。“我来做这件事，”她说，“这是条件的一部分。”
她的手指缓缓地、迟疑地触到他的头发，又赶紧缩回去。然后，她再次伸出手，并以非常轻柔的动作抚摸着。
“是干的，”她说．“摸起来感觉……很好。”
“你以前曾摸过头部毛发吗？”
“偶尔，不过都是小孩子的，这个……不一样。”她再度开始抚摸。
“哪里不一样？”即使处于这种尴尬情境中，谢顿的好奇心仍毫不退让。
“我说不出来，就是……不一样。”　过了一会儿，他问：“你摸够了吗？”
“没有，别催我。你能随心所欲让它们朝任何方向趴下吗？”
“并不尽然，它们有个自然的服帖的方向。我需要一把梳子才行，而我身上并没有。”
“梳子？”
“一种具有好些分叉的东西……啊，就像一把叉子……但是分叉多得多，而且多少柔软些。”
“能用手指吗？”她一面说，一面用她的手指梳过他的头发。
他说：“马马虎虎，效果不是很好。”
“后面的硬一点。”
“那里的头发比较短。”
雨点四三似乎想起什么事：“眉毛，”她说，“是这样叫的吗？”她摘下那两条遮带，手指沿着眉毛构成的轻微弧度逆向抚过。
“感觉很好。”说完她发出了一阵高亢的笑声，几乎可以跟她妹妹的笑声媲美。“真可爱。”
谢顿不太耐烦地说：“这个条件还有没有包含其他部分？”
在相当暗淡的光线下，雨点四三仿佛在考虑一个肯定的回答，但她什么也没说。反之，她突然缩回手去，再将双手举到鼻尖。谢顿纳闷她究竟想闻些什么。
“多么奇特，”她说，“我可以……可以改天再来一次吗？”
谢顿硬着头皮答道：“如果你将典籍多借我几天，让我有充分的时间研究，那么或许可以。”
雨点四三将手伸进裰服的一个隙缝，谢顿过去从未注意到它的存在。她从一隐藏式内袋中，取出一本由某种又硬又韧的质料装订封面的书。
谢顿接了过来，尽量控制住内心的兴奋。
当谢顿调整人皮帽，将头发重新遮起之际，雨点四三再度把双手举到鼻尖，接着又伸出舌头，很轻、很快地舔了下指头。
Chapter 47

"Felt your hair?" said Dors Venabili. She looked at Seldons hair as though she was of a mind to feel it herself.
Seldon moved away slightly. "Please dont. The woman made it seem like a perversion."
"I suppose it was--from her standpoint. Did you derive no pleasure from it yourself?"
"Pleasure? It gave me gooseflesh. When she finally stopped, I was able to breathe again. I kept thinking: What other conditions will she make?"
Dors laughed. "Were you afraid that she would force sex upon you? Or hopeful?"
"I assure you I didnt dare think. I just wanted the Book."
They were in their room now and Dors turned on her field distorter to make sure they would not be overheard.
The Mycogenian night was about to begin. Seldon had removed his skincap and kirtle and had bathed, paying particular attention to his hair, which he had foamed and rinsed twice. He was now sitting on his cot, wearing a light nightgown that had been hanging in the closet.
Dors said, eyes dancing, "Did she know you have hair on your chest?"
"I was hoping earnestly she wouldnt think of that."
"Poor Hari. It was all perfectly natural, you know. I would probably have had similar trouble if I was alone with a Brother. Worse, Im sure, since he would believe--Mycogenian society being what it is--that as a woman I would be bound to obey his orders without delay or demur."
"No, Dors. You may think it was perfectly natural, but you didnt experience it. The poor woman was in a high state of sexual excitement. She engaged all her senses ... smelled her fingers, licked them. If she could have heard hair grow, she would have listened avidly."
"But thats what I mean by natural. Anything you make forbidden gains sexual attractiveness. Would you be particularly interested in womens breasts if you lived in a society in which they were displayed at all times?"
"I think I might."
"Wouldnt you be more interested if they were always hidden, as in most societies they are?-- Listen, let me tell you something that happened to me. I was at a lake resort back home on Cinna ... I presume you have resorts on Helicon, beaches, that sort of thing?"
"Of course," said Seldon, slightly annoyed. "What do you think Helicon is, a world of rocks and mountains, with only well water to drink?"
"No offense, Hari. I just want to make sure youll get the point of the story. On our beaches at Cinna, were pretty lighthearted about what we wear ... or dont wear."
"Nude beaches?"
"Not actually, though I suppose if someone removed all of his or her clothing it wouldnt be much remarked on. The custom is to wear a decent minimum, but I must admit that what we consider decent leaves very little to the imagination."
Seldon said, "We have somewhat higher standards of decency on Helicon."
"Yes, I could tell that by your careful treatment of me, but to each its own. In any case, I was sitting at the small beach by the lake and a young man approached to whom I had spoken earlier in the day. He was a decent fellow I found nothing particularly wrong with. He sat on the arm of my chair and placed his right hand on my left thigh, which was bare, of course, in order to steady himself.
"After we had spoken for a minute and a half or so, he said, impishly. Here I am. You know me hardly at all and yet it seems perfectly natural to me that I place my hand on your thigh. Whats more, it seems perfectly natural to you, since you dont seem to mind that it remains there.
"It was only then that I actually noticed that his hand was on my thigh. Bare skin in public somehow loses some of its sexual quality. As I said, its the hiding from view that is crucial.
"And the young man felt this too, for he went on to say, Yet if I were to meet you under more formal conditions and you were wearing a gown, you wouldnt dream of letting me lift your gown and place my hand on your thigh on the precise spot it now occupies.
"I laughed and we continued to talk of this and that. Of course, the young man, now that my attention had been called to the position of his hand, felt it no longer appropriate to keep it there and removed it.
"That night I dressed for dinner with more than usual care and appeared in clothing that was considerably more formal than was required or than other women in the dining room were wearing. I found the young man in question. He was sitting at one of the tables. I approached, greeted him, and said, Here I am in a gown, but under it my left thigh is bare. I give you permission. Just lift the gown and place your hand on my left thigh where you had it earlier.
"He tried. Ill give him credit for that, but everyone was staring. I wouldnt have stopped him and Im sure no one else would have stopped him either, but he couldnt bring himself to do it. It was no more public then than it had been earlier and the same people were present in both cases. It was clear that I had taken the initiative and that I had no objections, but he could not bring himself to violate the proprieties. The conditions, which had been hand-on-thigh in the afternoon, were not hand-on-thigh in the evening and that meant more than anything logic could say."
Seldon said, "I would have put my hand on your thigh."
"Are you sure?"
"Positive."
"Even though your standards of decency on the beach are higher than ours are?"
"Yes."
Dors sat down on her own cot, then lay down with her hands behind her head. "So that youre not particularly disturbed that Im wearing a nightgown with very little underneath it."
"Im not particularly shocked. As for being disturbed, that depends on the definition of the word. Im certainly aware of how youre dressed."
"Well, if were going to be cooped up here for a period of time, well have to learn to ignore such things."
"Or take advantage of them," said Seldon, grinning. "And I like your hair. After seeing you bald all day, I like your hair."
"Well, dont touch it. I havent washed it yet." She half-closed her eyes. "Its interesting. Youve detached the informal and formal level of respectability. What youre saying is that Helicon is more respectable at the informal level than Cinna is and less respectable at the formal level. Is that right?"
"Actually, Im just talking about the young man who placed his hand on your thigh and myself. How representative we are as Cinnians and Heliconians, respectively, I cant say. I can easily imagine some perfectly proper individuals on both worlds--and some madcaps too."
"Were talking about social pressures. Im not exactly a Galactic traveler, but Ive had to involve myself in a great deal of social history. On the planet of Derowd, there was a time when premarital sex was absolutely free. Multiple sex was allowed for the unmarried and public sex was frowned upon only when traffic was blocked: And yet, after marriage, monogamy was absolute and unbroken. The theory was that by working off all ones fantasies first, one could settle down to the serious business of life."
"Did it work?"
"About three hundred years ago that stopped, but some of my colleagues say it stopped through external pressure from other worlds who were losing too much tourist business to Derowd. There is such a thing as overall Galactic social pressure too."
"Or perhaps economic pressure, in this case."
"Perhaps. And being at the University, by the way, I get a chance to study social pressures, even without being a Galactic traveler. I meet people from scores of places inside and outside of Trantor and one of the pet amusements in the social science departments is the comparison of social pressures.
"Here in Mycogen, for instance, I have the impression that sex is strictly controlled and is permitted under only the most stringent rules, all the more tightly enforced because it is never discussed. In the Streeling Sector, sex is never discussed either, but it isnt condemned. In the Jennat Sector, where I spent a week once doing research, sex is discussed endlessly, but only for the purpose of condemning it. I dont suppose there are any two sectors in Trantor--or any two worlds outside Trantor--in which attitudes toward sex are completely duplicated."
Seldon said, "You know what you make it sound like? It would appear--"
Dors said, "Ill tell you how it appears. All this talk of sex makes one thing clear to me. Im simply not going to let you out of my sight anymore."
"What?"
"Twice I let you go, the first time through my own misjudgment and the second because you bullied me into it. Both times it was clearly a mistake. You know what happened to you the first time."
Seldon said indignantly, "Yes, but nothing happened to me the second time."
"You nearly got into a lot of trouble. Suppose you had been caught indulging in sexual escapades with a Sister?"
"It wasnt a sexual--"
"You yourself said she was in a high state of sexual excitement."
"But--"
"It was wrong. Please get it through your head, Hari. From now on, you go nowhere without me."
"Look," said Seldon freezingly, "my object was to find out about Mycogenian history and as a result of the so-called sexual escapade with a Sister, I have a book--the Book."
"The Book! True, theres the Book. Lets see it."
Seldon produced it and Dors thoughtfully hefted it.
She said, "It might not do us any good, Hari. This doesnt look as though it will fit any projector Ive ever encountered. That means youll have to get a Mycogenian projector and theyll want to know why you want it. Theyll then find out you have this Book and theyll take it away from you."
Seldon smiled. "If your assumptions were correct, Dors, your conclusions would be inescapable, but it happens that this is not the kind of book you think it is. Its not meant to be projected. The material is printed on various pages and the pages are turned. Raindrop Forty-Three explained that much to me."
"A print-book!" It was hard to tell whether Dors was shocked or amused. "Thats from the Stone Age."
"Its certainly pre-Empire," said Seldon, "but not entirely so. Have you ever seen a print-book?"
"Considering that Im a historian? Of course, Hari."
"Ah, but like this one?"
He handed over the Book and Dors, smiling, opened it--then turned to another page--then flipped the pages. "Its blank," she said.
"It appears to be blank. The Mycogenians are stubbornly primitivistic, but not entirely so. They will keep to the essence of the primitive, but have no objection to using modern technology to modify it for conveniences sake. Who knows?"
"Maybe so, Hari, but I dont understand what youre saying."
"The pages arent blank, theyre covered with microprint. Here, give it back. If I press this little nubbin on the inner edge of the cover-- Look!"
The page to which the book lay open was suddenly covered with lines of print that rolled slowly upward.
Seldon said, "You can adjust the rate of upward movement to match your reading speed by slightly twisting the nubbin one way or the other. When the lines of print reach their upward limit when you reach the bottom line, that is--they snap downward and turn off. You turn to the next page and continue."
"Where does the energy come from that does all this?"
"It has an enclosed microfusion battery that lasts the life of the book."
"Then when it runs down--"
"You discard the book, which you may be required to do even before it runs down, given wear and tear, and get another copy. You never replace the battery."
Dors took the Book a second time and looked at it from all sides. She said, "I must admit I never heard of a book like this."
"Nor I. The Galaxy, generally, has moved into visual technology so rapidly, it skipped over this possibility."
"This is visual."
"Yes, but not with the orthodox effects. This type of book has its advantages. It holds far more than an ordinary visual book does."
Dors said, "Wheres the turn-on?--Ah, let me see if I can work it." She had opened to a page at random and set the lines of print marching upward. Then she said, "Im afraid this wont do you any good, Hari. Its pre-Galactic. I dont mean the book. I mean the print ... the language."
"Can you read it, Dors? As a historian--"
"As a historian, Im used to dealing with archaic language--but within limits. This is far too ancient for me. I can make out a few words here and there, but not enough to be useful."
"Good," said Seldon. "If its really ancient, it will be useful."
"Not if you cant read it."
"I can read it," said Seldon. "Its bilingual. You dont suppose that Raindrop Forty-Three can read the ancient script, do you?"
"If shes educated properly, why not?"
"Because I suspect that women in Mycogen are not educated past household duties. Some of the more learned men can read this, but everyone else would need a translation to Galactic." He pushed another nubbin. "And this supplies it."
The lines of print changed to Galactic Standard.
"Delightful," said Dors in admiration.
"We could learn from these Mycogenians, but we dont."
"We havent known about it."
"I cant believe that. I know about it now. And you know about it. There must be outsiders coming into Mycogen now and then, for commercial or political reasons, or there wouldnt be skincaps so ready for use. So every once in a while someone must have caught a glimpse of this sort of print-book and seen how it works, but its probably dismissed as something curious but not worth further study, simply because its Mycogenian."
"But is it worth study?"
"Of course. Everything is. Or should be. Hummin would probably point to this lack of concern about these books as a sign of degeneration in the Empire." He lifted the Book and said with a gush of excitement, "But I am curious and I will read this and it may push me in the direction of psychohistory."
"I hope so," said Dors, "but if you take my advice, youll sleep first and approach it fresh in the morning. You wont learn much if you nod over it."
Seldon hesitated, then said, "How maternal you are!"
"Im watching over you."
"But I have a mother alive on Helicon. I would rather you were my friend."
"As for that, I have been your friend since first I met you." She smiled at him and Seldon hesitated as though he were not certain as to the appropriate rejoinder.
Finally he said, "Then Ill take your advice--as a friend--and sleep before reading."
He made as though to put the Book on a small table between the two cots, hesitated, turned, and put it under his pillow.
Dors Venabili laughed softly. "I think youre afraid I will wake during the night and read parts of the Book before you have a chance to. Is that it?"
"Well," said Seldon, trying not to look ashamed, "that may be it. Even friendship only goes so far and this is my book and its my psychohistory."
"I agree," said Dors, "and I promise you that we wont quarrel over that. By the way, you were about to say something earlier when I interrupted you. Remember?"
Seldon thought briefly. "No."
In the dark, he thought only of the Book. He gave no thought to the hand-on-thigh story. In fact, he had already quite forgotten it, consciously at least.

第四十七章
　　“摸你的头发？”铎丝•凡纳比里一面说，一面望着谢顿的头发，仿佛她自己也想摸一下。
谢顿稍微避开一步：“拜托别这样，那女人表现得好像有些性变态。”
“从她的角度而言，我想应该就是。你自己没有从中得到乐趣吗？”
“乐趣？它使我全身起鸡皮疙瘩。当她终于停手之后，我才能继续呼吸。我本来还一直担心，她会再提出什么样的条件？”
铎丝哈哈大笑：“你怕她会强迫你发生性关系——还是你内心正期待如此？”
“我向你保证我没那么想，我只是想要那本典籍。”
此刻他们在自己的房间里，铎丝打开了她的电磁场扭曲器，以确保不会有人偷听到他们的谈话。
麦曲生的夜晚即将降临。谢顿早已脱下人皮帽与裰服，也已经洗过澡。洗澡时他特别注意自己的头发，总共冲洗了两次。现住他坐在他的便床上，穿着一件轻薄的睡衣，那是他在衣橱里找到的。
铎丝的双眼骨碌碌地乱转：“她知不知道你的胸部也有毛？”
“当时我就在祈祷她不会想到这一点。”
“可怜的哈里。你该知道，这些都是绝对自然的。如果我和一位兄弟单独相处，我也可能有类似的麻烦。我确信还要更糟，因为他会相信——从麦曲生这种社会结构看来——我身为女性，一定会服从他的命令，绝不会有任何迟疑或异议。”
“不，铎丝。你或许认为这是绝对自然的事，可是你没亲身经历过。当时，那可怜的女人处于高度性兴奋的状态。她所有的感官全用上了……不但闻她的手指，还伸舌头来舔。如果她能听见头发生长的声音，她也会贪婪地专心倾听。”
“但那正是我所谓的‘自然’，任何遭禁的事物都会产生性吸引力。如果你生活在一个妇女随时袒胸的社会，你会不会对女性的乳房特别感兴趣？”
“我想我可能会。”
“假如它们总是被遮起来，就像在人多数社会一样，难道你不会更感兴趣吗？
“听着，让我告诉你一件我亲身的经历。当时，我是在母星锡纳的一个湖滨度假胜地……我猜你们赫利肯也有度假胜地，例如沙滩之类的地方。”
“当然有，”谢顿有些恼火，“你把赫利肯想成什么？一个只有山脉和岩石，只有井水可以喝的世界？”
“我无意冒犯，哈里，只是要确定你能了解故事的背景。在锡纳的沙滩上，我们很不在意穿些什么……或是不穿什么。”
“裸体沙滩？”
“也没到那种程度，不过我想，假如有人把衣服全部脱掉，别人也不会多说什么。习惯上的穿着是得体的下限，但我必须承认，我们心目中的得体，并未留下什么想象空间。”
谢顿说：“在赫利肯，我们对得体的标准多少要高一点。”
“没错，从你对我的谨慎态度就能看得出来，可是各个世界总有个别差异。言归正传，有一次，我正坐在湖滨的沙滩上，一名年轻男子走了过来，当天稍早的时候，我曾和他讲过几句话。他是个举止得体的人，我不觉得他有什么不对劲。他坐上我的椅子扶手，将他的右手放在我的左大腿上，以便稳住他的身子。当然，我的大腿裸露在外。
“我们聊了大约一分半钟之后，他以顽皮的口气说：‘我坐在这里。你几乎不认识我，但我觉得将手放在你大腿上，似乎是一件很自然的事。非但如此，你好像也感到它很自然，因为你似乎不介意让它留在那里。’“直到那个时候，我才真正注意到他的手在我的大腿上。裸露在大庭广众之下的肌肤，多少丧失一些性的本质。正如我刚才所说，关键在于不让人看见的部分。
“那年轻男子也察觉到速一点，因为他继续说：‘但我若是在比较正式的场合遇到你，你穿着一件礼服，那你做梦也不会想到让我掀起你的礼服，将手放在你大腿上一模一样的位置。’“我哈哈大笑，然后我们继续聊了些别的。当然，由于我已注意到他的手放在哪里，那年轻人感到再让它留在那儿并不妥当，所以把手移开了。
“当天晚上用餐时，我打扮得较平常更为用心。那个场合不需要特别讲究穿着，我却穿得比餐厅中其他女士都正式。我找到那个年轻人，他坐在其中一个餐桌旁。我走过去，向他打个招呼，然后说：‘我现在穿着一什礼服，但里面的左腿是赤裸的。我准许你把我的礼服掀起来，将你的手放在我的左大腿、你早先所放的那个位置上。’“他试了一下——这点我不得不佩服他。每个人都盯着我们看。我不会阻止他，我也确定没有别人会阻止他，他却没法让自己真的那么做。当时的场合不比白天更为公开，而且在场的是同样一批人。采取主动的显然是我，我绝不会反对，但他就是不能让自己逾矩。当天下午让他能毛手毛脚的条件，到了晚上不再存在，这要比任何逻辑意义更为重大。”
谢顿说：“要是我就会把手放在你的大腿上。”
“你确定吗？”
“绝对确定。”
“即使你们对于沙滩穿着的得体标准比我们高？”
“没错。”
铎丝坐到她的便床上，然后躺下来，以双手垫着头部。“所以说，虽然我穿着一件晚礼服，里面几乎没穿，也不会带给你特别的困扰。”
“我不会特别震惊。至于困扰嘛，要看这个词怎样定义。我当然晓得你如何穿着。”
“嗯，假如我们将被关在这里一段时间，我们必须学习如何漠视这种事。”
“或者善加利用。”谢顿咧嘴笑了笑，“而且我喜欢你的头发，看了一整天光头的你，我喜欢你的头发。”
“唉，不要摸，我还没洗头。”她将眼睛半闭起来，“这很有趣，你将正式和非正式的庄重层面分了开来。你这话显示，赫利肯在非正式层面比锡纳更庄重，在正式层面则没那么庄重。对不对？”
“事实上，你只讲到那个将手放在你大腿上的年轻人，以及我们自已而已。我们两个能代表多少锡纳人和赫利肯人，我可不敢说。随便想也能知道，两个世界上都有些循规蹈矩的君子，也有些粗鲁无礼的家伙。”
“我们是在谈论社会压力。我不算是真正的银河游客，但我必须投注许多心力在社会史上。比方说，狄罗德行星曾有过一段时期，未婚性行为是绝对自由的，未婚者可拥有多个性伴侣，公开性行为只有在阻碍交通时才会引起反感。然而一旦结婚之后，双方就会绝对遵守一夫一妻制。他们的理论是先让一个人实现所有的幻想，这个人就能定下心来面对严肃的生活。”
“有用吗？”
“大约三百年前就终止了，不过我的一些同事说，那是其他数个世界对它施压的结果，因为有太多观光客被狄罗德吸引过去。别忘了，还有银河社会整体压力这种东西。”
“或许应该是经济压力——就这个例子而言。”
“或许吧。此外，即使我不是个银河游客，但我常年待在大学里，所以仍有机会研究社会压力。我能遇到来自川陀里里外外、许许多多地方的人，而在社会科学系所里，深受喜爱的消遣之一就是比较各种社会压力。
“比方说在麦曲生这里，我有一个印象，性受到严格的控制，只有在最苛刻的规范下才被允许，而且实施得一定比想象中严格，因为从来没有任何人讨论；但在斯璀璘区，人们也从不讨论性话题，而它并未受到谴责；我曾在坚纳特区进行过一周的研究，该区的人无休无止地谈论性话题，但唯一的目的只是为了谴责。我认为川陀的任何两个区——或是川陀之外的任何两个世界——对性的态度都不会完全一样。”
谢顿说：“你知道你这话听来像是在说什么吗？它好像……”
铎丝说：“我来告诉你它像什么。我们谈论的这些有关性的话题，使我认清一件事：我不会再让你离开我的视线。”
“什么？”
“我两次让你单独行动，第一次出于我自己的误判，第二次则因为你出言恫吓；两次显然都是错误的决定。你自己知道第一次发生了什么事。”
谢顿愤慨地说：“没错，可是第二次什么意外也没发生。”
“你差点惹上天大的麻烦。假如你和这位姐妹沉迷于性游戏时被逮个正着，那还得了？”
“那不是性——”
“你自己说过，她当时处于高度性兴奋的状态。”
“可是——”
“这是不对的，请把这点装进你的脑袋，哈里。从现在起，你到哪里我就跟到哪里。”
“听着，”谢顿以冰冷的口吻说，“我的目的是找出麦曲生的历史，而所谓和一位姐妹玩性游戏的结果，是我得到了一本书——那本典籍。”
“典籍！是啊，有一本典籍，让我们看看吧。”
谢顿将它取出来，铎丝若有所思地拿在手中掂了掂。
她说：“它对我们也许没什么用，哈里。看来它好像跟我见过的投影机都不相容，这就代表你得找一台麦曲生投影机。这样一来，他们便会想要知道你要它做什么，然后他们势必发现你拥有这本典籍，就一定会从你手中将它抢回去。”
谢顿微微一笑：“如果你的假设全部正确，铎丝，那么你的结论无懈可击。仉它刚巧不是你所想的那种书，并不需要使用投影机。它的内容印在许多书页上，可以一页一页翻阅，这些雨点四三都对我解释过了。”
“一本印刷书！”很难判断铎丝究竟是震惊或者是高兴，“那是石器时代的古物。”
“它的确是前帝国时代之前的产物，”谢顿说，“但也有后来添加的部分。你曾经见过印刷书吗？”
“当然见过，哈里，你忘了我是历史学家？”
“啊，但是像这本吗？”
他将典籍递过去。铎丝笑着将它打开，再翻到另一页，接着从头到尾迅速翻了一遍。“是空白的。”她说。
“应该说看来是空白的。麦曲生人是顽固的原始主义者，但并非完全如此。他们会固守原始的精髓，可是不反对为了增加便利，而利用现代科技进行改良，谁知道呢？”
“或许是吧，哈里，不过我不懂你在说什么。”
“这些书页不是空白的，上面都有缩微印刷字体。来，还给我。如果我按下封面内缘的这个小球——看！”
翻开的那页突然浮现出印刷字体，字体一行行缓缓向上移动。
谢顿说：“你只要前后稍微扭动这个小球，就可以调节上移的快慢，以配合你自己的阅读速率。当本页的字迹达到下限，也就是说，当你读到底端那一行的时候，它们就会猛然下落，然后自动关掉。这时，你就该翻到下一页。”
“发挥这些功能的能量从哪里来？”
“里面封装着一个微融合电池，它和这本书的寿命一样长。”
“那么当电用完了……”
“你就得丢掉这本书——或许还等不到电用完，你就会因为书磨损得太厉害，不得不把它丢了。新书随换随有——你永远不必更换电池。”
铎丝再次接过那本典籍，从各个角对观察它：“我必须承认，我从来没听说过像这样的书。”
“我也没有。一般而苦，银河早已跃过这个阶段，进入了视讯科技，以致略过了这个可能性。”
“这正是视讯啊。”
“没错，但它缺乏正统视讯的效果。不过这种形式的书自有其优点，它比普通视讯书籍的容量大许多倍。”
铎丝说：“开关在哪里？啊，让我看看自己会不会操作。”她信手翻开一页，并将印刷字体设定成上移。
然后她又说：“只怕这对你不会有任何用处，哈里，它是前银河时代的。我不是指这本书，我指的是印刷字体……是它的语言文字。”
“你读得懂吗，铎丝？身为历史学家……
“身为历史学家，我习惯于接触古代语文，但总有个限度。这对我而言实住太古老，我能在某些字句中认出几个字，却不足以派上用场。”
“好，”谢顿说，“如果它真的够古老，就一定会有用。”
“你读不懂就没用。”
“我读得懂，”谢顿说，“它是双语的。你不会以为雨点四三能读古代手稿吧，对不对？”
“假若她受过良好教育，又有何不可？”
“因为我怀疑麦曲生女性接受的教育不会超过家事的范畴。某些较有学问的人应该读得懂，但其他人都需要银河标准语的译本。”他按下另一个小球，“这样就行了。”
印刷字体立刻变作银河标准语文。
“好极了！，‘铎丝赞叹道。
“我们可以向这些麦曲生人学习一些事物，但我们没有这么做。”
“因为我们不知道啊。”
“我无法相信这点。现在我知道，而你也知道了。一定会有外人偶尔来到麦曲生，为了商业或政治目的，否则不会有许多人皮帽随时备用。所以每隔一段时间，总会有人瞥见这种印刷书，而且目睹它的运作。可是，它也许被当成稀奇但不值得深入研究的东西，而被那些人抛到脑后，只因它是麦曲生的产品。”
“但它真值得研究吗？”
“当然，每样东西都值得，或者说应该值得。夫铭也许会将对这些书漠不关心的现象，视为帝国正在哀落的一项征兆。”
他举起那本典籍，带着一股兴奋说道：“可是我有好奇心，我会阅读这玩意，它或许会将我推向心理史学的正道。”
“希望如此，”铎丝说，“但你若肯接受我的劝告，就该先睡一觉，等明早神清气爽时再来研究。假如你一直对着它打瞌睡，那是不可能学到什么的。”
谢顿迟疑了一下，然后说：“你可真有母性啊！”
“我是在照顾你。”
“可是我的母亲在赫利肯活得好好的，我宁愿你做我的朋友。”
“至于这点嘛，我第一次见到你的时候，就已经是你的朋友了。”
她冲着他微笑，谢顿却犹豫起来，仿佛不确定应该怎样回答才算妥当。最后他说：“那我就接受你的劝告——一位朋友的劝告，先睡一觉再说。”
他的动作像是要将典籍放在两床之间的小桌上，迟疑一会儿之后，他又转过身来，将它放在自己的枕头底下。
铎丝•凡纳比里轻轻笑再声来：“我想你是怕我会整夜不睡，在你没有机会阅读这本典籍之前，就抢先翻看部分内容。是不是这样？”
“嗯，”谢顿试图避免显露愧色，“也许是吧，即使友谊也该适可而止。这是我的书，也是我的心理史学。”
“我同意，”铎丝说，“而且我答应你，我们不会为这点争吵。对了，刚才你正想说什么，结果被我给打断了，记得吗？”
谢顿很快想了一下：“不记得。”
在黑暗中，他想到的只是那本典籍，并未将心思放在那个毛手毛脚的故事上。事实上，他几乎已经忘光了——至少在意识的层面如此。
Chapter 48

Venabili woke up and could tell by her timeband that the night period was only half over. Not hearing Haris snore, she could tell that his cot was empty. If he had not left the apartment, then he was in the bathroom. She tapped lightly on the door and said softly, "Hari?"
He said, "Come in," in an abstracted way and she did. The toilet lid was down and Seldon, seated upon it, held the Book open on his lap. He said, quite unnecessarily, "Im reading."
"Yes, I see that. But why?"
"I couldnt sleep. Im sorry."
"But why read in here?"
"If I had turned on the room light, I would have woken you up."
"Are you sure the Book cant be illuminated?"
"Pretty sure. When Raindrop Forty-Three described its workings, she never mentioned illumination. Besides, I suppose that would use up so much energy that the battery wouldnt last the life of the Book." He sounded dissatisfied.
Dors said, "You can step out, then. I want to use this place, as long as Im here."
When she emerged, she found him sitting cross-legged on his cot, still reading, with the room well lighted.
She said, "You dont look happy. Does the Book disappoint you?"
He looked up at her, blinking. "Yes, it does. Ive sampled it here and there. Its all Ive had time to do. The thing is a virtual encyclopedia and the index is almost entirely a listing of people and places that are of little use for my purposes. It has nothing to do with the Galactic Empire or the pre-Imperial Kingdoms either. It deals almost entirely with a single world and, as nearly as I can make out from what I have read, it is an endless dissertation on internal politics."
"Perhaps you underestimate its age. It may deal with a period when there was indeed only one world ... one inhabited world."
"Yes, I know," said Seldon a little impatiently. "Thats actually what I want--provided I can be sure its history, not legend. I wonder. I dont want to believe it just because I want to believe it."
Dors said, "Well, this matter of a single-world origin is much in the air these days. Human beings are a single species spread all over the Galaxy, so they must have originated somewhere. At least thats the popular view at present. You cant have independent origins producing the same species on different worlds."
"But Ive never seen the inevitability of that argument," said Seldon. "If human beings arose on a number of worlds as a number of different species, why couldnt they have interbred into some single intermediate species?"
"Because species cant interbreed. Thats what makes them species."
Seldon thought about it a moment, then dismissed it with a shrug. "Well, Ill leave it to the biologists."
"Theyre precisely the ones who are keenest on the Earth hypothesis."
"Earth? Is that what they call the supposed world of origin?"
"Thats a popular name for it, though theres no way of telling what it was called, assuming there was one. And no one has any clue to what its location might be."
"Earth!" said Seldon, curling his lips. "It sounds like a belch to me. In any case, if the book deals with the original world, I didnt come across it. How do you spell the word?"
She told him and he checked the Book quickly. "There you are. The name is not listed in the index, either by that spelling or any reasonable alternative."
"Really?"
"And they do mention other worlds in passing. Names arent given and there seems no interest in those other worlds except insofar as they directly impinge on the local world they speak of ... at least as far as I can see from what Ive read. In one place, they talked about The Fifty. I dont know what they meant. Fifty leaders? Fifty cities? It seemed to me to be fifty worlds."
"Did they give a name to their own world, this world that seems to preoccupy them entirely?" asked Dors. "If they dont call it Earth, what do they call it?"
"As youd expect, they call it the world or the planet. Sometimes they call it the Oldest or the World of the Dawn, which has a poetic significance, I presume, that isnt clear to me. I suppose one ought to read the Book entirely through and some matters will then grow to make more sense." He looked down at the Book in his hand with some distaste. "It would take a very long time, though, and Im not sure that Id end up any the wiser."
Dors sighed. "Im sorry, Hari. You sound so disappointed."
"Thats because I am disappointed. Its my fault, though. I should not have allowed myself to expect too much.--At one point, come to think of it, they referred to their world as Aurora. "
"Aurora?" said Dors, lifting her eyebrows.
"It sounds like a proper name. It doesnt make any sense otherwise, as far as I can see. Does it mean anything to you, Dors?"
"Aurora." Dors thought about it with a slight frown on her face. "I cant say Ive ever heard of a planet with that name in the course of the history of the Galactic Empire or during the period of its growth, for that matter, but I wont pretend to know the name of every one of the twenty-five million worlds. We could look it up in the University library--if we ever get back to Streeling. Theres no use trying to find a library here in Mycogen. Somehow I have a feeling that all their knowledge is in the Book. If anything isnt there, they arent interested."
Seldon yawned and said, "I think youre right. In any case, theres no use reading any more and I doubt that I can keep my eyes open any longer. Is it all right if I put out the light?"
"I would welcome it, Hari. And lets sleep a little later in the morning."
Then, in the dark, Seldon said softly, "Of course, some of what they say is ridiculous. For instance, they refer to a life expectancy on their world of between three and four centuries."
"Centuries?"
"Yes, they count their ages by decades rather than by years. It gives you a queer feeling, because so much of what they say is perfectly matter-of-fact that when they come out with something that odd, you almost find yourself trapped into believing it."
"If you feel yourself beginning to believe that, then you should realize that many legends of primitive origins assume extended life spans for early leaders. If theyre pictured as unbelievably heroic, you see, it seems natural that they have life spans to suit."
"Is that so?" said Seldon, yawning again.
"It is. And the cure for advanced gullibility is to go to sleep and consider matters again the next day."
And Seldon, pausing only long enough to think that an extended life span might well be a simple necessity for anyone trying to understand a Galaxy of people, slept.

第四十八章
　　铎丝•凡纳比里半夜醒来，她的计时带告诉她夜晚只过了一半。由于没有听到谢顿的鼾声，她可以断定他的便床是空的。倘若他未曾离开这间寓所，他就一定在浴室里面。
她轻轻敲了敲门，柔声说道：“哈里？’’
他以心不在焉的口气应道：“进来吧。”于是她走了进去。
马桶盖是放下来的，谢顿坐在上面，那本典籍摊在膝盖上。“我正在阅读。”
他这句话其实多此一举。
“是啊，我看得出来。可是为什么呢？”
“我睡不着，真抱歉。”
“可是为什么要在这里读呢？”
“如果我打开房间的灯，会把你惊醒。”
“你确定这本典籍不能自我照明吗？”
“十分确定。当雨点四三讲述它的功能时，她从未提到照明装置。此外，我想那样会消耗太多能量，使电池在这本典籍的寿命终结前结束。”他的口气听来并不满意。
铎丝说：“那么，你现在可以出去。我要用这个地方。”
当她出来的时候，发现他正盘腿坐在自己的便床上，仍然在专心阅读，而整个房间大放光明。
她说：“你看来不太高兴，这本典籍使你失望吗？”
他抬起头来，眨眨着眼睛望着她：“是的，的确如此。我能利用的时间不多，只好随意翻阅，我的时间只够这样做。这东西简直是一部百科全书，索引几乎全是人名和地名，对我根本没什么用。它完全未提到银河帝国或前帝国时代的众王国：记载的几乎全是单一世界的历史。根据我读到的部分分析，它的内容全是无休无止的内政议题。”
“或许你低估了它的年代。它记述的说不定的确是只有一个世界的时期……只有一个有人的世界。”
“没错，我知道。”谢顿显得有点不耐烦，“其实那正是我想要的——只要我能确定那是史实，而不是传说。我怀疑这点，我不安只为相信而相信。”
铎丝说：“嗯，有关单一世界起源的说法，近来实在流传其广。分布于整个银河的人类属于单一物种，所以必定源自某个角落——至少，这是目前最流行的观点。同样的物种，不可能独立起源于许多不同的世界。”
“但我一直看不出这个论证的必然性。”谢顿说，“如果人类当初起源于许多世界，分别属于许多不同的物种，为什么不能经由异种杂交，而形成一种居间的物种呢？”
“因为不同物种之间不能杂交，这点正是物种的定义。”
谢顿想了一会儿，然后耸耸肩，将它抛到脑后。“好啦，我把这个问题留给生物学家。”
“他们正是对地球假说最热衷的一群人。”
“地球？这是他们对那个所谓起源世界的称呼吗？”
“这是最普遍的名字，不过我们无法知晓当初它叫什么——假使真有个名字的话。至于它可能的位置，任何人都没有丝毫线索。”
“地球！”谢顿撅着嘴说，“在我听来好像浑球一样。无论如何，如果这本书讨论的是起源世界，我到现在都还没找到它。那个名字怎么写？”
她告诉他之后，他便迅速查阅那本典籍。“你看，这个名字没有列在索引里面，不论是那两个字，还是任何合理的同义字。”
“真的？”
“他们的确随口提到其他一些世界，不过没写出名字来。他们对其他世界好像都没兴趣，只有对他们叙述的那个世界造成直接侵扰的世界例外——至少，我目前读到的内容给我这种感觉。在某个地方，他们谈论到‘第五十号’。我不知道他们是什么意思，第五十位领袖？第五十个城市？在我看来似乎是第五十个世界。”
“他们有没有提到自己世界的名字——这个似乎占据他们一切心思的世界？”
铎丝问道：“如果他们不称它地球，他们又管它叫什么呢？”
“你该料想得到，他们管它叫‘本世界’或‘本行星’，有时则称它‘最古世界’或‘黎明世界’，我猜后者带有诗意的象征，但我不清楚其中的意思。我想我们得将这本典籍从头到尾读一遍，某些内容才会变得较有意义。”他带着几分烦恼的表情，低头望着手中的典籍。“不过，那将花上很长一段时问，而我不确定读完后会不会找到答案。”
铎丝叹了一口气：“我很遗憾，哈里。你的口气听来十分失望。”
“那是因为我真的很失望。不过，这是我自己的错，我不该让自己抱太大期望——啊，我想起来了，在某一处他们称他们的世界为‘奥罗拉’。”
“奥罗拉？”铎丝扬起眉毛。
“听来像是一个专有名词，据我所知，它没有任何其他含意。你懂它的意思吗，铎丝？”
“奥罗拉——”铎丝一面想，一面露出些许凝重的神色。“在银河帝国的整个历史中，甚至在它的发展阶段，我都不敢说听过哪个行星叫这个名字。但是，我不会装作知道两千五百万个世界的每一个名字。我们可以在大学图书馆查一下——假如我们还有机会回斯璀璘。在麦曲生这里，想找图书馆是徒劳无功的事。我总有一种感觉，他们所有的知识都在这本典籍中，若是什么东西不在里面，他们就不会有兴趣。”
谢顿打了一个哈欠：“我想你是对的。无论如何，再读下去也没什么用，而我怀疑我的眼睛还能睁多久。你不介意我把灯关了吧？”
“当然不介意，哈里。我们早上还可以睡晚一点。”
在接下来的黑暗中，谢顿轻声说道：“当然，他们的记述有些实在荒谬。比方说，他们提到在他们的世界上，平均寿命介于三至四个世纪之间。”
“世纪？”
“没错，他们不用年来计算年龄，而是以百年为单位。这给人一种诡异的感觉，因为不论他们提到什么古怪的事物，叙述口吻都显得稀松平常，使人几乎要信以为真。”
“假如你觉得自己几乎要信以为真，那么你就应该了解，许多有关原始起源的传说，都假设早期领袖人物拥有数倍于现代人的寿命。他们被刻画成具有不可思议的神勇，你想，配以超长的寿命似乎是很自然的事。”
“是这样的吗？”激顿又打了一个哈欠。
“是的。而治疗重度冤大头症的方法就是赶紧睡个好觉，等明天再来想这些问题。”
谢顿静默下来，忽而想到：如果要了解整个银河的人类。超长的寿命或许正是基本必要条件。刚想到这里，他便进入了梦乡。
Chapter 49

The next morning, feeling relaxed and refreshed and eager to begin his study of the Book again, Hari asked Dors, "How old would you say the Raindrop sisters are?"
"I dont know. Twenty ... twenty-two?"
"Well, suppose they do live three or four centuries."
"Hari. Thats ridiculous."
"Im saying suppose. In mathematics, we say suppose all the time and see if we can end up with something patently untrue or self-contradictory. An extended life span would almost surely mean an extended period of development. They might seem in their early twenties and actually be in their sixties."
"You can try asking them how old they are."
"We can assume theyd lie."
"Look up their birth certificates."
Seldon smiled wryly. "Ill bet you anything you like--a roll in the hay, if youre willing--that theyll claim they dont keep records or that, if they do, they will insist those records are closed to tribespeople."
"No bet," said Dors. "And if thats true, then its useless trying to suppose anything about their age."
"Oh no. Think of it this way. If the Mycogenians are living extended life spans that are four or five times that of ordinary human beings, they cant very well give birth to very many children without expanding their population tremendously. You remember that Sunmaster said something about not having the population expand and bit off his remarks angrily at that time."
Dors said, "What are you getting at?"
"When I was with Raindrop Forty-Three, I saw no children."
"On the microfarms?"
"Yes."
"Did you expect children there? I was with Raindrop Forty-Five in the shops and on the residential levels and I assure you I saw a number of children of all ages, including infants. Quite a few of them."
"Ah." Seldon looked chagrined. "Then that would mean they cant be enjoying extended life spans."
Dors said, "By your line of argument, I should say definitely not. Did you really think they did?"
"No, not really. But then you cant close your mind either and make assumptions without testing them one way or another."
"You can waste a lot of time that way too, if you stop to chew away at things that are ridiculous on the face of it."
"Some things that seem ridiculous on the face of it arent. Thats all. Which reminds me. Youre the historian. In your work, have you ever come across objects or phenomena called robots?"
"Ah! Now youre switching to another legend and a very popular one. There are any number of worlds that imagine the existence of machines in human form in prehistoric times. These are called robots.
"The tales of robots probably originate from one master legend, for the general theme is the same. Robots were devised, then grew in numbers and abilities to the status of the almost superhuman. They threatened humanity and were destroyed. In every case, the destruction took place before the actual reliable historic records available to us today existed. The usual feeling is that the story is a symbolic picture of the risks and dangers of exploring the Galaxy, when human beings expanded outward from the world or worlds that were their original homes. There must always have been the fear of encountering other--and superior--intelligences."
"Perhaps they did at least once and that gave rise to the legend."
"Except that on no human--occupied world has there been any record or trace of any prehuman or nonhuman intelligence."
"But why robots? Does the word have meaning?"
"Not that I know of, but its the equivalent of the familiar automata. "
"Automata! Well, why dont they say so?"
"Because people do use archaic terms for flavor when they tell an ancient legend. Why do you ask all this, by the way?"
"Because in this ancient Mycogenian book, they talk of robots. And very favorably, by the way.--Listen, Dors, arent you going out with Raindrop Forty-Five again this afternoon?"
"Supposedly--if she shows up."
"Would you ask her some questions and try to get the answers out of her?"
"I can try. What are the questions?"
"I would like to find out, as tactfully as possible, if there is some structure in Mycogen that is particularly significant, that is tied in with the past, that has a sort of mythic value, that can--"
Dors interrupted, trying not to smile. "I think that what you are trying to ask is whether Mycogen has a temple."
And, inevitably, Seldon looked blank and said, "Whats a temple?"
"Another archaic term of uncertain origin. It means all the things you asked about--significance, past, myth. Very well, Ill ask. Its the sort of thing, however, that they might find difficult to speak of. To tribespeople, certainly."
"Nevertheless, do try."
Sacratorium
AURORA-- ... A mythical world, supposedly inhabited in primordial times, during the dawn of interstellar travel. It is thought by some to he the perhaps equally mythical "world of origin" of humanity and to be another name for "Earth." The people of the Mycogen (q.v.) Sector of ancient Trantor reportedly held themselves to be descended from the inhabitants of Aurora and made that tenet central to their system of beliefs, concerning which almost nothing else is known ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第四十九章
　　早上，谢顿觉得心情轻松、神清气爽，急着想要继续研究那本典籍。他对铎丝说：“你认为雨点姐妹有多大年纪？”
“我不知道，二十……二十二？”
“嗯，假设他们真能活三四个世纪……”
“哈里，那太荒谬了。”
“我是说假设。在数学中，我们一天到晚在说‘假设’，看看是否会导致什么明显的错误，或是自相矛盾的结果。倍增的寿命几乎确定意味着倍增的发育期，她们可能看来二十出头，实际上已经六十几岁。”
“你可以试着问问她们几岁。”
“她们很可能会说谎。”
“那就查查她们的出生证明。”
谢顿露出一丝苦笑：“我随便你赌什么都可以——和你在干草堆打滚，如果你愿意。我赌她们会声称没有那种记录，即使有的话，她们也会坚持那些记录不能对外族人曝光？”
“不赌。”铎丝说，“假如这是真的，那么试图对她们的年龄做任何假设都没用。”
“噢，不。你想想，如果麦曲生人拥有超长的寿命，长达普通人类的四五倍，他们就不太可能生育太多子女，否则会使他们的人口剧增？你该记得，日主说过不能让人口增加之类的话，而且还愤愤地连忙住口。”
铎丝说：“你想说什么？”
“当我和雨点四三在一起的时候，始终没见到小孩。”
“在微生农场？”
“对。”
“你指望那里会有小孩吗？昨天我和雨点四五在商店购物，还经过一些居住层。我向你保证，我看见许多各种年龄的儿童，包括婴儿在内，为数还真不少。”
“啊。”谢顿露出懊恼的表情，“那么这就代表他们不可能享有超长寿命。”
铎丝说：“根据你的推论方式，我会说绝无可能。你原来以为有可能吗？”
“不，并不认真。可是话说回来，你也不能封闭自己的心灵，仅仅做出了一些假设，而不利用各种方法一一检验。”
“假如你碰到表面看来荒谬绝伦的事，都要停下来细究一番，也会浪费很多时间。”
“有些事情表面看来似乎荒谬，事实却不然。这倒提醒了我，你是历史学家，在你的研究工作中，曾经碰到一种称为‘机仆’的对象或现象吗？”
“啊！现在你又转到另一个传说，而且是非常热门的一个。许多世界都猜想史前时代有人形机器存在，它们通称为机仆。有关机仆的故事也许最初都源自同一个传说，因为大意都一样。机仆是人类发明的，后来，它们的数量和能力都增长到近乎超人的地步。它们威胁到人类，最后被人类尽数毁灭。在每个传说中，毁灭行动都发生于真实历史记录早已无可考据的年代。我们通常觉得这个故事只是一种意象，代表人类从一个或数个源头母星开始向外扩张、探索整个银河时所面临的风险和危险。他们必定始终怀有一种恐惧，担心会遇到其他的——而且是超人的智慧生灵。”
“或许他们的确至少碰过一次，才会衍生出这个传说。”
“只不过在人类居住的世界上，都没有任何‘前人类’或‘非人类’智慧生灵的记录或遗迹。”
“可是为什么要叫机仆呢？这个名字有任何意义吗？”
“据我所知并没有，但它和一般常听到的‘机器人’是同义词。”
“机器人！哼，他们为什么不这样说？”
“因为在讲述占老传说时，人们喜欢使用古典词汇来营造气氛。对了，你为什么要问这些？”
“因为在这本古老的麦曲生典籍中，他们就捉到了机仆，而且还有极佳的评价。听我说，铎丝，你今天下午不是又要跟雨点四五出去吗？”
“原则上是——如果她现身。”
“你能不能问她一些问题，试图从她口中套出答案？”
“我可以试试，哪些问题？”
“我想要问出来——以尽可能技巧的方式——麦曲生有没有哪座建筑是意义特别重大的，是和过去息息相关的，是具有某种神话价值的，是可以……”
铎丝打断了他的话，她压抑着笑意说：“我想你试图问的问题，是麦曲生有没有一座寺庙。”
谢顿不可避免地露出茫然的表情：“寺庙是什么？”
“另一个起源不明的古老词汇。它意味着你问及的所有事物——重大意义、过去、神话。很好，我会问她。然而，这种事正是她们可能感到难以启齿的。当然，我是指对外族人而言。”
“纵然如此，还是试试吧。”
【上册完】
Chapter 50

The two Raindrops arrived at midmorning. Raindrop Forty-Five seemed as  cheerful as ever, but Raindrop Forty-Three paused just inside the door,  looking drawn and circumspect. She kept her eyes down and did not as  much as glance at Seldon.
Seldon looked uncertain and gestured to Dors, who said in a cheerful  businesslike tone of voice, "One moment, Sisters. I must give  instructions to my man or he wont know what to do with himself today."
They moved into the bathroom and Dors whispered, "Is something wrong?"
"Yes. Raindrop Forty-Three is obviously shattered. Please tell her that I will return the Book as soon as possible."
Dors favored Seldon with a long surprised look. "Hari," she said, "youre  a sweet, caring person, but you havent the good sense of an amoeba. If I  as much as mention the Book to the poor woman, shell be certain that  you told me all about what happened yesterday and then shell really be  shattered. The only hope is to treat her exactly as I would ordinarily."
Seldon nodded his head and said dispiritedly, "I suppose youre right."

Dors returned in time for dinner and found Seldon on his cot, still  leafing through the Book, but with intensified impatience. He looked up  with a scowl and said, "If were going to be staying here any length of  time, were going to need a communication device of some sort between us.  I had no idea when youd get back and I was a little concerned."
"Well, here I am," she said, removing her skincap gingerly and looking  at it with more than a little distaste. "Im really pleased at your  concern. I rather thought youd be so lost in the Book, you wouldnt even  realize I was gone."
Seldon snorted.
Dors said, "As for communications devices, I doubt that they are easy to  come by in Mycogen. It would mean easing communication with  tribespeople outside and I suspect the leaders of Mycogen are bound and  determined to cut down on any possible interaction with the great  beyond."
"Yes," said Seldon, tossing the Book to one side, "I would expect that  from what I see in the Book. Did you find out about the whatever you  called it ... the temple?"
"Yes," she said, removing her eyebrow patches. "It exists. There are a  number of them over the area of the sector, but theres a central  building that seems to be the important one.--Would you believe that one  woman noticed my eyelashes and told me that I shouldnt let myself be  seen in public? I have a feeling she intended to report me for indecent  exposure."
"Never mind that," said Seldon impatiently. "Do you know where the central temple is located?"
"I have directions, but Raindrop Forty-Five warned me that women were  not allowed inside except on special occasions, none of which are coming  up soon. Its called the Sacratorium."
"The what."
"The Sacratorium."
"What an ugly word. What does it mean?"
Dors shook her head. "Its new to me. And neither Raindrop knew what it  meant either. To them, Sacratorium isnt what the building is called, its  what it is. Asking them why they called it that probably sounded like  asking them why a wall is called a wall."
"Is there anything about it they do know?"
"Of course, Hari. They know what its for. Its a place thats devoted to  something other than the life here in Mycogen. Its devoted to another  world, a former and better one."
"The world they once lived on, you mean?"
"Exactly. Raindrop Forty-Five all but said so, but not quite. She couldnt bring herself to say the word."
"Aurora?"
"Thats the word, but I suspect that if you were to say it out loud to a  group of Mycogenians, they would be shocked and horrified. Raindrop  Forty-Five, when she said, The Sacratorium is dedicated to--, stopped at  that point and carefully wrote out the letters one by one with her  finger on the palm of her hand. And she blushed, as though she was doing  something obscene."
"Strange," said Seldon. "If the Book is an accurate guide, Aurora is  their dearest memory, their chief point of unification, the center about  which everything in Mycogen revolves. Why should its mention be  considered obscene? Are you sure you didnt misinterpret what the Sister  meant?"
"Im positive. And perhaps its no mystery. Too much talk about it would  get to tribespeople. The best way of keeping it secret unto themselves  is to make its very mention taboo."
"Taboo?"
"A specialized anthropological term. Its a reference to serious and  effective social pressure forbidding some sort of action. The fact that  women are not allowed in the Sacratorium probably has the force of a  taboo. Im sure that a Sister would be horrified if it was suggested that  she invade its precincts."
"Are the directions you have good enough for me to get to the Sacratorium on my own?"
"In the first place, Hari, youre not going alone. Im going with you. I  thought we had discussed the matter and that I had made it clear that I  cannot protect you at long distance--not from sleet storms and not from  feral women. In the second place, its impractical to think of walking  there. Mycogen may be a small sector, as sectors go, but it simply isnt  that small."
"An Expressway, then."
"There are no Expressways passing through Mycogenian territory. It would  make contact between Mycogenians and tribespeople too easy. Still,  there are public conveyances of the kind that are found on less  developed planets. In fact, thats what Mycogen is, a piece of an  undeveloped planet, embedded like a splinter in the body of Trantor,  which is otherwise a patchwork of developed societies.--And Hari, finish  with the Book as soon as possible. Its apparent that Rainbow  Forty-Three is in trouble as long as you have it and so will we be if  they find out."
"Do you mean a tribesperson reading it is taboo?"
"Im sure of it."
"Well, it would be no great loss to give it back. I should say that 95  percent of it is incredibly dull; endless in-fighting among political  groups, endless justification of policies whose wisdom I cannot possibly  judge, endless homilies on ethical matters which, even when  enlightened, and they usually arent, are couched with such infuriating  self-righteousness as to almost enforce violation."
"You sound as though I would be doing you a great favor if I took the thing away from you."
"Except that theres always the other 5 percent that discusses the  never-to-be-mentioned Aurora. I keep thinking that there may be  something there and that it may be helpful to me. Thats why I wanted to  know about the Sacratorium.
"Do you hope to find support for the Books concept of Aurora in the Sacratorium?"
"In a way. And Im also terribly caught up in what the Book has to say  about automata, or robots, to use their term. I find myself attracted to  the concept."
"Surely, you dont take it seriously?"
"Almost. If you accept some passages of the Book literally, then there is an implication that some robots were in human shape."
"Naturally. If youre going to construct a simulacrum of a human being, you will make it look like a human being."
"Yes, simulacrum means likeness, but a likeness can be crude indeed. An  artist can draw a stick figure and you might know he is representing a  human being and recognize it. A circle for the head, a stalk for the  body, and four bent lines for arms and legs and you have it. But I mean  robots that really look like a human being, in every detail."
"Ridiculous, Hari. Imagine the time it would take to fashion the metal  of the body into perfect proportions, with the smooth curve of  underlying muscles."
"Who said metal, Dors? The impression I got is that such robots were  organic or pseudo-organic, that they were covered with skin, that you  could not easily draw a distinction between them and human beings in any  way."
"Does the Book say that?"
"Not in so many words. The inference, however--"
"Is your inference, Hari. You cant take it seriously."
"Let me try. I find four things that I can deduce from what the Book  says about robots--and I followed up every reference the index gave.  First, as I say, they--or some of them--exactly resembled human beings;  second, they had very extended life spans--if you want to call it that."
"Better say effectiveness, " said Dors, "or youll begin thinking of them as human altogether."
"Third," said Seldon, ignoring her, "that some--or, at any rate, at least one--continues to live on to this day."
"Hari, thats one of the most widespread legends we have. The ancient  hero does not die but remains in suspended animation, ready to return to  save his people at some time of great need. Really, Hari."
"Fourth," said Seldon, still not rising to the bait, "there are some  lines that seem to indicate that the central temple--or the Sacratorium,  if thats what it is, though I havent found that word in the Book,  actually--contains a robot." He paused, then said, "Do you see?"
Dors said, "No. What should I see?"
"If we combine the four points, perhaps a robot that looks exactly like a  human being and that is still alive, having been alive for, say, the  last twenty thousand years, is in the Sacratorium."
"Come on, Hari, you cant believe that."
"I dont actually believe it, but I cant entirely let go either. What if  its true? What if--its only one chance out of a million, I admit--its  true? Dont you see how useful he could be to me? He could remember the  Galaxy as it was long before any reliable historical records existed. He  might help make psychohistory possible."
"Even if it was true, do you suppose the Mycogenians would let you see and interview the robot?"
"I dont intend to ask permission. I can at least go to the Sacratorium and see if theres something to interview first."
"Not now. Tomorrow at the earliest. And if you dont think better of it by morning, we go."
"You told me yourself they dont allow women--"
"They allow women to look at it from outside, Im sure, and I suspect that is all well get to do."
And there she was adamant.
Hari Seldon was perfectly willing to let Dors take the lead. She had  been out in the main roadways of Mycogen and was more at home with them  than he was. Dors Venabili, brows knitted, was less delighted with the  prospect. She said, "We can easily get lost, you know."
"Not with that booklet," said Seldon.
She looked up at him impatiently. "Fix your mind on Mycogen, Hari. What I  should have is a computomap, something I can ask questions of. This  Mycogenian version is just a piece of folded plastic. I cant tell this  thing where I am. I cant tell it by word of mouth and I cant even tell  it by pushing the necessary contacts. It cant tell me anything either  way. Its a print thing."
"Then read what it says."
"Thats what Im trying to do, but its written for people who are familiar with the system to begin with. Well have to ask."
"No, Dors. That would be a last resort. I dont want to attract  attention. I would rather we take our chances and try to find our own  way, even if it means making one or two wrong turns."
Dors leafed through the booklet with great attention and then said  grudgingly, "Well, it gives the Sacratorium important mention. I suppose  thats only natural. I presume everyone in Mycogen would want to get  there at one time or another." Then, after additional concentration, she  said, "Ill tell you what. Theres no way of taking a conveyance from  here to there."
"What?"
"Dont get excited. Apparently, theres a way of getting from here to  another conveyance that will take us there. Well have to change from one  to another."
Seldon relaxed. "Well, of course. You cant take an Expressway to half the places on Trantor without changing."
Dors cast an impatient glance at Seldon. "I know that too. Its just that  Im used to having these things tell me so. When they expect you to find  out for yourself, the simplest things can escape you for a while."
"All right, dear. Dont snap. If you know the way now, lead. I will follow humbly."
And follow her he did, until they came to an intersection, where they  stopped. Three white-kirtled males and a pair of gray-kirtled females  were at the same intersection. Seldon tried a universal and general  smile in their direction, but they responded with a blank stare and  looked away. And then the conveyance came. It was an outmoded version of  what Seldon, back on Helicon, would have called a gravi-bus. There were  some twenty upholstered benches inside, each capable of holding four  people. Each bench had its own doors on both sides of the bus. When it  stopped, passengers emerged on either side. (For a moment, Seldon was  concerned for those who got out on the traffic side of the gravi-bus,  but then he noticed that every vehicle approaching from either direction  stopped as it neared the bus. None passed it while it was not moving.)
Dors pushed Seldon impatiently and he moved on to a bench where two  adjoining seats were available. Dors followed after. (The men always got  on and got off first, he noticed.)
第五十章
第十一部 圣堂
奥罗拉：……一个神话世界，在太初时代、星际旅行的黎明期，其上应该曾有人类居住。有人认为它就是“地球”的别名——那个或许同样神秘的人类“起源世界”。
据说古川陀麦曲生区（参见该条）的民众，将自己视为奥罗拉居民的后裔。并以这点作为他们信仰体系的中心教条。
除此之外，外人对这个信仰几乎一无所知……
——《银河百科全书》


第五十章
雨点姐妹在十时左右抵达。雨点四五似乎快活依旧，但雨点四三只是伫立在门边，看来愁眉苦脸又小心翼翼。她始终低垂目光，连瞥也末瞥谢顿一眼。
谢顿显得有些不安，他对铎丝做了一个手势。于是铎丝以愉悦而老练的语气说：“等一下，姐妹们，我必须对我的男人做些指示，否则他不知道自己今天该做什么。”
他们走进浴室后，铎丝悄声说道：“有什么不对劲吗？”
“是的，雨点四三显然魂不守舍。请告诉她，我会尽快归还那本典籍。”
铎丝惊讶地看着谢顿，好一会儿才开口道：“哈里，”她说，“你很可爱，很体谅人，但你的感觉还比不上一条变形虫。要是我对那个可怜的女人提到那本典籍，她就会确定你把昨天的事全告诉了我，然后她才会真的神不守舍。我唯一能做的，就是以和平常一模一样的方式对待她。”
谢顿点了点头，垂头丧气地说：“我想你是对的。”
铎丝刚好赶在晚餐前回来，发现谢顿正坐在便床上。手里仍在翻阅那本典籍，可是显得越来越不耐烦。
他带着一脸阴霾抬起头来：“如果我们要在这里多待一些时日，我们就需要一套某种通讯装置。我根本不晓得你什么时候会回来，我真有点担心。”
“好啦，我现在回来了。”她一而说，一面小心翼翼地脱下人皮帽，表情厌恶地望着它。“你会担心真令我感到高兴。我还以为你早就被这本典籍迷住，甚至没有察觉我出门了。”
谢顿哼了一声。
铎丝说：“至于通讯装置，我相信在麦曲生不容易弄到手。否则，那就代表能轻易和外族人通讯。我觉得麦曲生的领袖都有坚定的意志，决心切断和外界一切可能的接触。”
“没错，”谢顿把典籍丢到一旁，“根据我阅读这本典籍的心得，这点我也料想得到。你有没有问到你所谓的那种……寺庙？”
“有的，”她一面说，一面将眉毛遮带摘下。“果然存在。在本区范围内，这种建筑为数甚多，可是有座中心建筑似乎是最重要的——你相不相信，有个女的注意到我的睫毛，告诉我说我不该在公共场所露面？我有一种感觉，她打算告发我犯了猥亵暴露罪。”
“别担心那个，”谢顿不耐烦地说，“你知道那座中心寺庙在哪里吗？”
“我问到了地址，但是雨点四五警告我，除非是一些特别的日子，否则女性一律不准进入，而最近都碰不到那种日子。对了，它称为圣堂。”
“什么？”
“圣堂。”
“多难听的名字，有什么意义吗？”
铎丝摇了摇头：“我第一次听到，两位雨点也都不知道它的意思。对她们而言，圣堂并非那座建筑的名字，它就是那座建筑物。问她们为何这样称呼，听来也许就像问她们为何把墙壁叫做墙壁。”
“关于这个圣堂，有没有她们知道的事？”
“当然有，哈里，她们知道它的用途，那个地方是一种不•属于麦曲生此地的生活。它是为了纪念另一个世界，原先那个较佳的世界。”
“他们一度居住的那个世界，你是这个意思吗？”
“完全正确。雨点四五几乎就是这么说的，不过没有说明白。她无法让自己说出那个名字。”
“奥罗拉？”
“就是这个名字，但我想你要是对一群麦曲生人大声说出这个名字，他们会感到极度震惊和恐惧。雨点四五说到‘圣堂是纪念……’就突然打住，改用手指在手掌上仔仔细细、一笔一画写下那个名字。然后她涨红了脸，仿佛做了什么下流的事。”
“真奇怪。”谢顿说，“如果这本典籍是正确的指南，奥罗拉就是他们最亲密的记忆，是他们凝聚的首要重心，是麦曲生境内万事万物运转的枢纽。为什么提到它会被视为下流呢？你确定没有误解那位姐妹的意思？”
“我很肯定，而这也许没什么神秘。谈得太多就会被外族人听去，最好的保密办法就是让它成为禁忌。”
“禁忌？”
“这是人类学的一个专用术语，意指一种严厉而有效的社会压力，足以禁止人们的某种行动。女性不准进入圣堂的这件事实，或许就有禁忌的力量在内。假如你建议一位姐妹侵入它的境域，我确定她一定会吓得半死。”
“你打听到的地址，足以让我自己找到圣堂吗？”
“首先我得告诉你，哈里，你不会自己单独行动——我要跟你一起去。我想我们已经讨论过这点，而且我说得很明白，我无法在远距离保护你——不论是对抗夹着冰珠的暴风雪，或者是如狼似虎的女人。其次，想走到那里去是不切实际的。就行政区而言，麦曲生或许是个小区，但绝未小到那种程度。”
“那么，改搭捷运吧。”
“没有捷运经过麦曲生境内，那会让麦曲生人和外族人的接触变得太容易。然而，这里还是有大众交通工具——属于低度开发行星常用的那种。事实上，这就是麦曲生的写照，一小块末开发的行星，像碎片一样嵌在川陀表面，否则川陀就完全由已开发社会连缀而成。还有，哈里，尽快把那本典籍读完。只要它还在你手上，雨点四三显然就身处险境，假如被别人发现的话，那么我们也会一样。”
“你的意思是说，外族人阅读典籍是一种禁忌？”
“我肯定是。”
“好吧，还回去也不会有太大损失。在我看来，百分之九十五的内容都枯燥得不可思议，例如政治团体间无休无止的明争暗斗，对一些本人无从判断多高明的政策无休无止的辩护。此外还有对伦理议题喋喋不休的说教，即使它是文明开化的思想，措辞中也充满令人愤慨的自以为是，几乎让人不想违反也难，况且通常根本不知所云。”
“听你的几气，好像我若是把它拿走，等于帮了你一个大忙。”
“不过，总是还有另外百分之五，讨论到那个不可直呼其名的奥罗拉。我猜，那里也许有什么东西，而它也许对我有帮助。这就是我想打听圣堂的原因。”
“你希望在圣堂里找到线索，以支持典籍中对奥罗拉的说法？”
“可以这么说。此外，我对典籍中提到的那些机器人——或者用他们的称呼，对那些机仆起了强烈的好奇心；我发现自己被这个想法深深吸引。”
“不用说，你不是当真的吧？”
“不，我不是随口说说。你若接受典籍中某些片段的字面意义，那么它就暗示着一件事实：某些机器人具有人形。”
“这很自然。假如你想建构人类的拟像，就会把它造得看来像人类。”
“没错，拟像的意思是‘相像’，但相像可以是很粗略的。一位艺术家如果单以线条表示人形，你也该认得出来。圆圈代表脑袋，长方形代表身体，四根弯曲的线条代表手脚，这就行了。但我的意思是说，就每个细节而言，机器人看起来都绝对酷似人类。”
“简直荒谬，哈里。想想看，要花多少时间才能将金属躯体塑成完美的比例，并且表现出内部肌肉的平滑纹理。”
“谁说金属了，铎丝？就我所得到的印象，这种机器人的材料都是有机或假有机体。它们外表覆盖着一层皮肤，很难从任何角度区分它们和真人的不同。”
“典籍上这么说吗？”
“没有用那么多字句。然而，根据推论……”
“那是你的推论，哈里。你不能太认真。”
“让我试试看。我已找遍索引中每一条有关机器人的资料，根据那本典籍对机器人所做的记述，我发现可以推论出四件事。第一，我已经说过，它们，或者它们的一部分，形体和人类一模一样。第二，它们拥有超长的寿命，如果你想这么说的话。”
“最好说‘有效期’。”铎丝说，“否则你会开始将它们完全当成人类。”
“第三，”谢顿并未理会她，继续说道，“有些——或者，无论如何至少有一个机器人——一直活到今天。”
“哈里，这是人类流传最广的传说之一。古代的英雄永远不死，只是进入一种生理机能停顿的状态，随时会在紧要关头回来拯救他的同胞。”
“第四，”谢顿仍然没有上钩，“有几行字似乎指出，那个中心寺庙——或者说圣堂，不过事实上，我在典籍中没找到这个词汇——那里面有个机器人。”他顿了一下，然后说：“你懂了吗？”
铎丝说：“不懂，我该懂些什么？”
“我们如果将这四点组合起来，那么圣堂里也许有个和真人一模一样的机器人，他至今仍旧活着，已经存活了……比如说两万年。”
“得了吧，哈里，你不可能相信这种事。”
“我不是真的相信，但我无法完全漠视。如果这是真的呢？我承认，这只有百万分之一的机会，不过若是真的呢？你看不出他对我会有多大帮助吗？他能记得古老的银河是什么样子，那是比任何可靠的历史记录还要古老而真实的描述。他或许能成就我的心理史学。”
“即使这是真的，你以为麦曲生人会让你跟这个机器人晤谈吗？”
“我并不打算请求他们准许，我至少可以先到圣堂去，看看那里是否有什么晤谈的对象。”
“现在不行，最快也要等明天。假如明天早上你还没改变决定，我们就去。”
“你自己告诉我，他们不允许女性——”
“他们允许女性站在外面看，这点我可以肯定，而我怀疑我们能做的也仅止于此。”
她的语气斩钉截铁。
Chapter 51
"For instance," she said and pointed to a smooth boxed-off area on the back of the bench directly before each of them. As soon as the conveyance had begun to move, words lit up, naming the next stop and the notable structures or crossways that were nearby.
"Now, that will probably tell us when were approaching the changeover we want. At least the sector isnt completely barbaric."
"Good," said Seldon. Then, after a while, leaning toward Dors, he whispered, "No one is looking at us. It seems that artificial boundaries are set up to preserve individual privacy in any crowded place. Have you noticed that?"
"Ive always taken it for granted. If thats going to be a rule of your psychohistory, no one will be very impressed by it."
As Dors had guessed, the direction plaque in front of them eventually announced the approach to the changeover for the direct line to the Sacratorium. They exited and again had to wait. Some buses ahead had already left this intersection, but another gravi-bus was already approaching. They were on a well-traveled route, which was not surprising; the Sacratorium was bound to be the center and heartbeat of the sector.
They got on the gravi-bus and Seldon whispered, "Were not paying."
"According to the map, public transportation is a free service."
Seldon thrust out his lower lip. "How civilized. I suppose that nothing is all of a piece, not backwardness, not barbarism, nothing."
But Dors nudged him and whispered, "Your rule is broken. Were being watched. The man on your right."

第五十一章
　　哈里•谢顿极乐意让铎丝带路。她曾经逛过麦曲生的大街，对这些街道比他熟悉。
铎丝•凡纳比里眉头紧锁，她对情况并没有那么乐观。“我们很容易迷路，你知道的。”
“有这本小册子就不会。”谢顿说。
她抬起头，不耐烦地望着他：“把你的心思放在麦曲生上面，哈里。我该拿的是一套计算机地图——我可以对它发问的那种东西。这份麦曲生地图只是一叠塑料布，我不能用嘴巴跟它说我在哪里；甚至不能借助按键告诉它。而它也不能告诉我什么，它只是个印刷品。”
“那就读读它的内容。”
“这正是我在试着做的事，但它是写给本来就熟悉这种系统的人看的，我们必须找人问路。”
“不，铎丝，那是最后的办法，我不想引人注意。我宁可我们自己碰碰运气，试着找出正确路径，即使因此转错一两个弯也无妨。”
铎丝极其专心地翻看那本小册子，然后不情不愿地说：“嗯，它对圣堂做了突出的描述，我想这是理所当然的事。我敢说，每一个麦曲生人总会想到那里去。”
她又仔细钻研了一会儿，说：“告诉你吧，根本没有任何从这儿到那儿的交通工具。”
“什么？”
“别激动。有办法从这里搭车到另一处，再改搭另一辆年带我们去那里。也就是说，我们必须换一次车。”
谢顿松了一口气：“嗯，当然。即使搭乘捷运，如果不换车，川陀也有一半地方到不了。”
铎丝不耐烦地瞥了谢顿一眼。“这点我也知道，只不过我习惯了让这类东西告诉我答案。当指望你来找出答案时，最简单的事都能让你好一阵子摸不着头绪。”
“好吧，铎丝，别生气。如果你现在知道该怎么走，那就带路吧，我将谦卑地跟在后面。”
于是他跟着她前进，到了一个交叉路口，两人停下了脚步。
在这个路口等车的，还有二位身穿白色裰服的男性，以及二位穿灰裰服的女性。谢顿试着向他们投以一个世界通行的微笑，他们却回敬了一个白眼，接着便将目光转开。
交通工具来了，那是一辆式样过时的车子，在谢顿的家乡赫利肯，通常称之为重力公交车。它里面有二十几张罩着布套的长椅，每张能容纳四个人。在公交车的两侧，每张长椅都有独立的车门。它停下来之后，乘客纷纷从两侧下车。（一时之间，谢顿不禁为那些从街心侧下车的人担心，但他随即注意到，来往车辆在接近公交车时都停了下来，而当公交车尚未开动时，没有任何一辆超越它。）
铎丝不耐烦地推了谢顿一下，他赶紧走到一张还有两个相连座位的长椅旁，铎丝则跟在他后面。（男士总是优先上下车，他注意到这点。）
铎丝低声对他说：“别再研究别人了，注意你的四周。”
“我会试试。”
“比如说——”她一面说，一面指着他们正前方椅背上隔出的一方平坦区域。
公交车开动后，那上面立刻亮出字迹，标示出下一站的站名、著名的建筑物，或是附近的十字路口。
“好了，我们接近转车的地方时，它或许会告诉我们。至少这一区并非全然未开化。”
“很好。”谢顿答道。过了一会儿，他倾身凑向铎丝，悄声说：“没有人在看我们。任何一个拥挤的地方，似乎都自动形成一个个人防线，好让每个人都能保有隐私。你注意到这点吗？”
“我已经司空见惯了。假如这将成为你的心理史学法则之一，没有人会觉得了不起。”
正如铎丝猜测的，最后他们面前的方向指示牌终于宣布：即将抵达圣堂直达专车的转车站。
他们下车之后，还得再等一下。前面几辆公交车已经离开这个路口，不过另有一辆重力公交车即将进站。他们将搭乘的是一条热门路线，这没什么好奇怪的，因为圣堂必定是本区的枢纽与心脏地带。
他们上了那辆重力公交车，谢顿惝声说道：“我们都没付钱。”
“根据这份地图，大众运输工具是免费的服务。”
谢顿撅起下唇：“多么文明啊。我想任何事物都不能一概而论，不论是落后、先进，或是任何一样事物。”
不料铎丝用手肘轻推他一下，压低声音说：“你的法则被打破了，已经有人盯上我们，坐在你右边的那个男的。”
Chapter 52

Seldons eyes shifted briefly. The man to his right was rather thin and seemed quite old. He had dark brown eyes and a swarthy complexion, and Seldon was sure that he would have had black hair if he had not been depilated. He faced front again, thinking. This Brother was rather atypical. The few Brothers he had paid any attention to had been rather tall, light-skinned, and with blue or gray eyes. Of course, he had not seen enough of them to make a general rule.
Then there was a light touch on the right sleeve of his kirtle. Seldon turned hesitantly and found himself looking at a card on which was written lightly, CAREFUL, TRIBESMAN!
Seldon started and put a hand to his skincap automatically. The man next to him silently mouthed, "Hair."
Seldons hand found it, a tiny exposure of bristles at his temple. He must have disturbed the skincap at some point or another. Quickly and as unobtrusively as possible, he tugged the skincap, then made sure that it was snug under the pretence of stroking his head.
He turned to his neighbor on his right, nodded slightly, and mouthed, "Thank you."
His neighbor smiled and said in a normal speaking voice, "Going to the Sacratorium?"
Seldon nodded. "Yes, I am."
"Easy guess. So am I. Shall we get off together?" His smile was friendly.
"Im with my--my--"
"With your woman. Of course. All three together, then?"
Seldon was not sure how to react. A quick look in the other direction showed him that Dorss eyes were turned straight ahead. She was showing no interest in masculine conversation--an attitude appropriate for a Sister. However, Seldon felt a soft pat on his left knee, which he took (with perhaps little justification) to mean: "Its all right."
In any case, his natural sense of courtesy was on that side and he said, "Yes, certainly."
There was no further conversation until the direction plaque told them they were arriving at the Sacratorium and Seldons Mycogenian friend was rising to get off.
The gravi-bus made a wide turn about the perimeter of a large area of the Sacratorium grounds and there was a general exodus when it came to a halt, the men sliding in front of the women to exit first. The women followed.
The Mycogenians voice crackled a bit with age, but it was cheerful. He said, "Its a little early for lunch my ... friends, but take my word for it that things will be crowded in not too long a time. Would you be willing to buy something simple now and eat it outside? I am very familiar with this area and I know a good place."
Seldon wondered if this was a device to maneuver innocent tribespeople into something or other disreputable or costly, yet decided to chance it. "Youre very kind," he said. "Since we are not at all familiar with the place, we will be glad to let you take the lead."
They bought lunch--sandwiches and a beverage that looked like milk--at an open-air stand. Since it was a beautiful day and they were visitors, the old Mycogenian said, they would go to the Sacratorium grounds and eat out of doors, the better to become acquainted with their surroundings.
During their walk, carrying their lunch, Seldon noted that, on a very small scale, the Sacratorium resembled the Imperial Palace and that the grounds around it resembled, on a minute scale, the Imperial grounds. He could scarcely believe that the Mycogenian people admired the Imperial institution or, indeed, did anything but hate and despise it, yet the cultural attraction was apparently not to be withstood.
"Its beautiful," said the Mycogenian with obvious pride.
"Quite," said Seldon. "How it glistens in the daylight."
"The grounds around it," he said, "are constructed in imitation of the government grounds on our Dawn World ... in miniature, to be sure."
"Did you ever see the grounds of the Imperial Palace?" asked Seldon cautiously.
The Mycogenian caught the implication and seemed in no way put out by it. "They copied the Dawn World as best they could too."
Seldon doubted that in the extreme, but he said nothing. They came to a semicircular seat of white stonite, sparkling in the light as the Sacratorium did.
"Good," said the Mycogenian, his dark eyes gleaming with pleasure. "No ones taken my place. I call it mine only because its my favorite seat. It affords a beautiful view of the side wall of the Sacratorium past the trees. Please sit down. Its not cold, I assure you. And your companion. She is welcome to sit too. She is a tribeswoman, I know, and has different customs. She ... she may speak if she wishes."
Dors gave him a hard look and sat down.
Seldon, recognizing the fact that they might remain with this old Mycogenian a while, thrust out his hand and said, "I am Hari and my female companion is Dors. We dont use numbers, Im afraid."
"To each his ... or her ... own," said the other expansively. "I am Mycelium Seventy-Two. We are a large cohort."
"Mycelium?" said Seldon a bit hesitantly.
"You seem surprised," said Mycelium. "I take it, then, youve only met members of our Elder families. Names like Cloud and Sunshine and Starlight--all astronomical."
"I must admit--" began Seldon.
"Well, meet one of the lower classes. We take our names from the ground and from the micro-organisms we grow. Perfectly respectable."
"Im quite certain," said Seldon, "and thank you again for helping me with my ... problem in the gravi-bus."
"Listen," said Mycelium Seventy-Two, "I saved you a lot of trouble. If a Sister had seen you before I did, she would undoubtedly have screamed and the nearest Brothers would have bustled you off the bus--maybe not even waiting for it to stop moving."
Dors leaned forward so as to see across Seldon. "How is it you did not act in this way yourself?"
"I? I have no animosity against tribespeople. Im a scholar."
"A scholar?"
"First one in my cohort. I studied at the Sacratorium School and did very well. Im learned in all the ancient arts and I have a license to enter the tribal library, where they keep book-films and books by tribespeople. I can view any book-film or read any book I wish to. We even have a computerized reference library and I can handle that too. That sort of thing broadens your mind. I dont mind a little hair showing. Ive seen pictures of men with hair many a time. And women too." He glanced quickly at Dors.
They ate in silence for a while and then Seldon said, "I notice that every Brother who enters or leaves the Sacratorium is wearing a red sash."
"Oh yes," said Mycelium Seventy-Two. "Over the left shoulder and around the right side of the waist--usually very fancily embroidered."
"Why is that?"
"Its called an obiah. It symbolizes the joy felt at entering the Sacratorium and the blood one would spill to preserve it."
"Blood?" said Dors, frowning.
"Just a symbol. I never actually heard of anyone spilling blood over the Sacratorium. For that matter, there isnt that much joy. its mostly wailing and mourning and prostrating ones self over the Lost World." His voice dropped and became soft. "Very silly."
Dors said, "Youre not a ... a believer?"
"Im a scholar," said Mycelium with obvious pride. His face wrinkled as he grinned and took on an even more pronounced appearance of age.
Seldon found himself wondering how old the man was. Several centuries?--No, theyd disposed of that. It couldnt be and yet, "How old are you?" Seldon asked suddenly, involuntarily.
Mycelium Seventy-Two showed no signs of taking offense at the question, nor did he display any hesitation at answering, "Sixty-seven."
Seldon had to know. "I was told that your people believe that in very early times everyone lived for several centuries."
Mycelium Seventy-Two looked at Seldon quizzically. "Now how did you find that out? Someone must have been talking out of turn ... but its true. There is that belief. Only the unsophisticated believe it, but the Elders encourage it because it shows our superiority. Actually, our life expectancy is higher than elsewhere because we eat more nutritionally, but living even one century is rare."
"I take it you dont consider Mycogenians superior," said Seldon.
Mycelium Seventy-Two said, "Theres nothing wrong with Mycogenians. Theyre certainly not inferior. Still, I think that all men are equal.--Even women," he added, looking across at Dors.
"I dont suppose," said Seldon, "that many of your people would agree with that."
"Or many of your people," said Mycelium Seventy-Two with a faint resentment. "I believe it, though. A scholar has to. Ive viewed and even read all the great literature of the tribespeople. I understand your culture. Ive written articles on it. I can sit here just as comfortably with you as though you were ... [tit]."
Dors said a little sharply, "You sound proud of understanding tribespeoples ways. Have you ever traveled outside Mycogen?"
Mycelium Seventy-Two seemed to move away a little. "No."
"Why not? You would get to know us better."
"I wouldnt feel right. Id have to wear a wig. Id be ashamed."
Dors said, "Why a wig? You could stay bald."
"No," said Mycelium Seventy-Two, "I wouldnt be that kind of fool. Id be mistreated by all the hairy ones."
"Mistreated? Why?" said Dors. "We have a great many naturally bald people everywhere on Trantor and on every other world too."
"My father is quite bald," said Seldon with a sigh, "and I presume that in the decades to come I will be bald too. My hair isnt all that thick now."
"Thats not bald," said Mycelium Seventy-Two. "You keep hair around the edges and over your eyes. I mean bald--no hair at all."
"Anywhere on your body?" said Dors, interested.
And now Mycelium Seventy-Two looked offended and said nothing.
Seldon, anxious to get the conversation back on track, said, "Tell me, Mycelium Seventy-Two, can tribespeople enter the Sacratorium as spectators?"
Mycelium Seventy-Two shook his head vigorously. "Never. Its for the Sons of the Dawn only."
Dors said, "Only the Sons?"
Mycelium Seventy-Two looked shocked for a moment, then said forgivingly, "Well, youre tribespeople. Daughters of the Dawn enter only on certain days and times. Thats just the way it is. I dont say I approve. If it was up to me, Id say, Go in. Enjoy if you can. Sooner others than me, in fact."
"Dont you ever go in?"
"When I was young, my parents took me, but--he shook his head--"it was just people staring at the Book and reading from it and sighing and weeping for the old days. Its very depressing. You cant talk to each other. You cant laugh. You cant even look at each other. Your mind has to be totally on the Lost World. Totally." He waved a hand in rejection. "Not for me. Im a scholar and I want the whole world open to me."
"Good," said Seldon, seeing an opening. "We feel that way too. We are scholars also, Dors and myself."
"I know," said Mycelium Seventy-Two.
"You know? How do you know?"
"Youd have to be. The only tribespeople allowed in Mycogen are Imperial officials and diplomats, important traders, and scholars--and to me you have the look of scholars. Thats what interested me in you. Scholars together." He smiled delightedly.
"So we are. I am a mathematician. Dors is a historian. And you?"
"I specialize in ... culture. Ive read all the great works of literature of the tribespeople: Lissauer, Mentone, Novigor--"
"And we have read the great works of your people. Ive read the Book, for instance.--About the Lost World."
Mycelium Seventy-Twos eyes opened wide in surprise. His olive complexion seemed to fade a little. "You have? How? Where?"
"At our University we have copies that we can read if we have permission."
"Copies of the Book?"
"Yes."
"I wonder if the Elders know this?"
Seldon said, "And Ive read about robots."
"Robots?"
"Yes. That is why I would like to be able to enter the Sacratorium. I would like to see the robot." (Dors kicked lightly at Seldons ankle, but he ignored her.)
Mycelium Seventy-Two said uneasily, "I dont believe in such things. Scholarly people dont." But he looked about as though he was afraid of being overheard.
Seldon said, "Ive read that a robot still exists in the Sacratorium."
Mycelium Seventy-Two said, "I dont want to talk about such nonsense."
Seldon persisted. "Where would it be if it was in the Sacratorium?"
"Even if one was there, I couldnt tell you. I havent been in there since I was a child."
"Would you know if there was a special place, a hidden place?"
"Theres the Elders aerie. Only Elders go there, but theres nothing there."
"Have you ever been there?"
"No, of course not."
"Then how do you know?"
"I dont know that theres no pomegranate tree there. I dont know that theres no laser-organ there. I dont know that theres no item of a million different kinds there. Does my lack of knowledge of their absence show they are all present?"
For the moment, Seldon had nothing to say.
A ghost of a smile broke through Mycelium Seventy-Twos look of concern. He said, "Thats scholars reasoning. Im not an easy man to tackle, you see. Just the same, I wouldnt advise you to try to get up into the Elders aerie. I dont think youd like what would happen if they found a tribesman inside.--Well. Best of the Dawn to you." And he rose suddenly--without warning--and hurried away.
Seldon looked after him, rather surprised. "What made him rush off like that?"
"I think," said Dors, "its because someone is approaching."
And someone was. A tall man in an elaborate white kirtle, crossed by an even more elaborate and subtly glittering red sash, glided solemnly toward them. He had the unmistakable look of a man with authority and the even more unmistakable look of one who is not pleased.
第五十二章
　　谢顿的眼睛很快瞟了一下。坐在他右边的男士稍显瘦削，而且似乎相当年长。
他有一时深褐色的眼珠，以及一身黝黑的皮肤。谢顿可以确定，假如他未曾接受脱毛手术，他一定会有一头黑发。
他再度面向前方，开始寻思：这位兄弟的外表相当特殊。他曾注意过少数几位兄弟，他们的个子都不算矮，而且肤色很淡，有着蓝色或灰色的眼珠。当然，他见过的人还不够多，不足以列出一条通则。
然后，他感到裰服的右手袖子被轻轻碰了一下。谢顿迟疑地转过头去，发觉眼前出现一张卡片，上面写着一行淡淡的字迹：“外族人，小心！”
谢顿吓了一跳，自然而然伸手去摸人皮帽。此时，身旁那位男士做出一组无声的口型：“头发。”
谢顿摸到了，原来太阳穴处有一绺短发露出来。刚才不知什么时候，他一定扯到了这顶人皮帽。他尽可能谨慎地赶紧将它向下拉，然后装作好像是在摸头，用手在附近探了探，以确定人皮帽已回到原位。
他向右转身，对邻座轻轻点了点头，以唇语说了声：“谢谢你。”
邻座那人微微一笑，改用正常的声音说：“去圣堂吗？”
谢顿点了点头：“对，正要去。”
“很容易猜到。我也一样，我们要不要一块下车？”他的笑容相当友善。
“我带着我的……我的……”
“你的女人。那么，三个人一块吧？”
谢顿不知道该如何回应。他很快向另一侧望了望，发觉铎丝的眼睛已转向正前方。她的态度完全符合一位姐妹该有的举止——对男性的交谈毫无反应，这是符合一位姐妹身份的态度。然而，谢顿感到左膝被轻拍了一下，他把它的意思（也许没有什么正当理由）诠释为：“没关系。”
无论如何，礼数使他自然而然认同这一点。于是他说：“好，当然好。”
他们之间并未再做任何交谈。不久，方向指示牌显示圣堂刮了，那位麦曲生友人便起身准备下车。
重力公交车在圣堂广场做了一个大转弯，画出一个很大的圆形轨迹。车子停妥后，众多乘客纷纷下车。男士挤到前面先行走出车门，女士们则跟在后面。
这位麦曲生人由于上了年纪，声音有点沙哑，不过口气十分快活。他说：“现在吃午餐是早了点，我的……朋友们。不过相信我，要不了多久就会非常拥挤。你们愿不愿意现在就买点简单的食物，然后在外面吃？我对这一带很熟，我知道一个好地方。”
谢顿疑心这是个圈套，专门诱骗无知的外族人购买什么特别差劲或昂贵的东西。不过，他决定冒一次险。
“你实在太好了。”他说，“我们对这个地方一点也不熟，我们很高兴有你当向导。”
他们在一个露天小摊买了午餐——三明治与一种看来像是牛奶的饮料。既然天气很好，而且他们又是游客，所以那位麦曲生老者建议，三人一同走到圣堂广场，在户外将午餐解决，这样有助于他们熟悉周围的环境。
当他们拿着午餐，一路向前走的时候，谢顿注意到圣堂类似一个缩小许多倍的皇宫，周围的广场仿佛是个具体而微缩的御苑。他几乎不能相信麦曲生人竟会崇拜皇室建筑，或是做出除了憎恨它、轻视它之外的任何行为。然而，文化上的吸引力显然无可抵御。
“它真漂亮。”那位麦曲生人带着明显的骄傲说。
“是啊，”谢顿说，“它在白昼之下多么灿烂耀眼。”
“周围的广场，”他说，“是模仿我们黎明世界上的政府广场建造的……事实上，是缩小很多的仿制品。”
“你见过皇宫周围的御苑吗？”谢顿小心翼翼地问。
那麦曲生人察觉到了这句话的含意，但是似乎一点也不生气。“他们也是尽可能仿照黎明世界。”
谢顿心里全然不信，但什么也没说。
他们来到一个半圆形的白色石椅旁，它也像圣堂一样在日光下闪闪发亮。
“太好了，”这位麦曲生人的黑眼珠闪耀着喜悦的光彩，“没有人占据我的地盘。我将它称为我的，只因为它是我最心爱的座位。从这里穿过树木看出去，可以见到圣堂边墙的美丽景观。请坐下来，它并不冰冷，我向你保证。还有你的同伴，也欢迎她坐下。她是一名外族女子，我知道，因而拥有不同的习俗。她……她若想说话可以随意。”
铎丝狠狠瞪了他一眼，然后才坐下来。
谢顿明白他们大概会跟这位麦曲生老者待一会儿，于是伸出手来说：“我叫哈里，我的女伴名叫铎丝，只是我们不用号码。”
“各人自有他自己……或她自己……的规矩。”对方以大方的口气说，“我是菌丝七二，我们是个大支族。”
“菌丝？”谢顿带着点犹豫说。
“你似乎很惊讶。”菌丝说，“那么我猜想，你只遇见过那些长老家族的人。诸如云朵、阳光、星光之类的名字——全都是天象。”
“我必须承认……”谢顿的话只说了一半。
“嗯。现在见一见低下阶层的人吧。我们从土地上，以及我们栽培的微生物中撷取我们的名字，它们尊严无比。”
“完全同意，”谢顿说，“再次谢谢你在重力公交车上帮我解决……问题。”
“听着，”菌丝七二说，“我帮你免除了许多麻烦。假使一位姐妹在我之前看到你。她无疑将发出尖叫，旁边的兄弟们就会把你推下公交车——也许甚至不等它停下来。”
铎丝往前倾身，以便让视线越过谢顿。“你自己又为何没有这种反应？”
“我？我对外族人没有敌意，我是一位学者。”
“学者？”
“我们支族中的第一个。我就读于圣堂学院，而且成绩很好。我对一切古代艺术都有研究，此外我还有许可证，可以进入外族图书馆，那里收藏着外族人的胶卷书和传统书。我能随心所欲阅读任何胶卷书，或是阅读任何一本传统书。我们甚至有一间计算机化的图书馆，而我也能使用。这样做有助于开拓心灵，我不介意见到一点头发露出来。我看过许多次留着头发男人的照片，还有女人的。”他瞥了铎丝一眼。
他们默默吃了一会儿午餐，然后谢顿说：“我注意到每位进出圣堂的兄弟，身上都披挂着一条红色肩带。”
“喔，没错。”菌丝七二说，“从左肩垂下来，在腰际右侧环绕一圈，通常都有非常别致的刺绣。”
“那是为什么？”
“它称为‘和带’，象征进入圣堂所感到的喜悦，以及为保护它而甘愿喷洒的鲜血。”
“鲜血？”铎丝皱着眉头说。
“只是一种象征，我从未真正听说有什么人血溅圣堂。此外，这里也没什么喜悦，主要都是对‘失落世界’的恸哭、悲叹，或是顶礼膜拜。”他的音调降低，并且变得柔和，“非常愚蠢。”
铎丝说：“你不是一位……一位信徒？”
“我是一位学者。”菌丝带着明显的骄傲说。当他咧嘴而笑时，他的脸孔皱成一团，使得老态更加明显。谢顿发觉自己对此人的年纪感到好奇，数个世纪？不，他们已经排除这个假设。那是不可能的，然而……
“你有多大岁数？”谢顿不知不觉脱口问道。
对于这个问题，菌丝七二毫不介意，回答也未显出任何迟疑。“六十七。”
谢顿非要追根究底：“我听说你们族人相信，在极早的时代，每个人都能活好几世纪。”
菌丝七二以怪异的神情望着谢顿：“你是怎么知道的？一定有人口无遮拦……但那是真的，的确有这种信仰。只有天真的人才会相信，可是长老们却鼓励这种信仰，因为它能显出我们的优越。事实上，我们的平均寿命确实高于其他地方，因为我们吃得比较营养，可是活到一个世纪的实在少之又少。”
“我猜你并不认为麦曲生人比较优越。”谢顿说。
菌丝七二说：“麦曲生人没什么问题，他们当然绝非拙劣。然而，我认为所有人都是平等的——甚至包括女人在内。”他在补充这句话时，朝铎丝的方向望了一眼。
“而我认为，”谢顿说，“你们族人同意这点的不会太多。”
“你们族人同意的也不会太多。”菌丝七二带着一丝愤恨应道，“不过我对此深信不疑——一位学者理当如此。外族人所有的伟大文学作品，我全部通过投影甚至肉眼读过。我了解你们的文化，还写过这方面的文章。我可以自在地和你们坐在这里，就好像你们是……我们的一员。”
铎丝略显唐突地说：“听你的口气，好像以了解外族人的种种而自豪。你到麦曲生外面旅行过吗？”
菌丝七二似乎向后退了一点：“没有。”
“为什么不去呢？那样你会对我们更加了解。”
“我会觉得不对劲，我必须戴一顶假发，那令我感到羞愧。”
铎丝说：“为何要戴假发？你可以光着头啊。”
“不行，”菌丝七二说，“我才不会那么傻，否则我将被所有拥有毛发的人欺负。”
“欺负？为什么？”铎丝说，“不论是在川陀各个角落，或是其他任何一个世界上，随处都能见到许多天生的秃子。”
“我的父亲就相当秃，”谢顿叹了一声，“而我想在未来几十年内，我也会变成秃头。我的头发现在就不怎么浓密。”
“那不是光头，”菌丝七二说，“你们有周围一圈毛发，还有眼睛上面的。我的意思是光秃秃——完全没有毛发。”
“全身都没有吗？”铎丝很感兴趣。
这回菌丝七二看来真生气了，他什么也没说。
谢顿急着想将话题拉回来，他说：“告诉我，菌丝七二，外族人能以旁观者的身份进入圣堂吗？”
菌丝七二猛力摇了摇头：“绝对不行，它的门只为黎明之子而开。”
铎丝说：“只有黎明之子？”
菌丝七二不以为意地说：“嗯，你们是外族人。只有在某些特定的日子和时辰，黎明之女方可进入。规定就是这样，我并没说我也赞同。如果由我做主，我会说：‘进去吧，玩个尽兴。’事实上，我自己会排在最后。”
“你从来没进去过吗？”
“在我小的时候，父母曾经带我去过。可是——”他摇了摇头，“里面只有一些凝视典籍的人，他们诵读其中的章句，为古老的日子叹息、流泪。气氛非常沉闷，你不能跟人交谈，你不能笑出声来，你甚至不能望着别人。你的心灵必须完全放在失落世界上，完完全全。”他挥了挥手，表示无法认同。“我可不吃这一套。我是一位学者，我要整个世界对我开放。”
“说得好，”谢顿发觉机会终于出现，“我们有同感。我们两人也是学者，铎丝和我。”
“我知道。”菌丝七二说。
“你知道？你怎么知道？”
“你们一定是。获准进入麦曲生的外族人，仅限于帝国官员、外交使节和重要的商人，此外就是学者。而在我看来，你们有学者的长相。这就是我对你们感兴趣的原因，物以类聚嘛。”他露出开怀的笑容。
“你猜得真准。我是个数学家，铎丝是历史学家，你呢？”
“我的专长是——文化。我读过外族人所有的伟大文学作品：黎叟尔、曼通、诺维葛……”
“我们则读过你们族人的伟大作品。比如说，我曾经读过你们的典籍——有关失落世界的记述。”
菌丝七二惊讶得张大眼睛，橄榄色的皮肤似乎稍微褪色。“你读过？怎么会？在哪里？”
“在我们大学里，我们有些副本。只要获得允许，我们就能阅读。”
“典籍的副本？”
“没错。”
“我怀疑长老们是否知道这件事？”
谢顿说：“我还读过有关机仆的记载。”
“机仆？”
“是的。所以我才会希望能进入圣堂，我想看看那个机仆。”（铎丝轻踢谢顿的足踝，但他并未理会。）
菌丝七二不安地说：“我不相信这种事，有学问的人都不相信。”但他四下东张西望，仿佛害怕有人偷听。
谢顿说：“我读到一段记载，说是有个机仆仍在圣堂里面。”
菌丝七二说：“我不想讨论这些无稽之谈。”
谢顿毫不放松：“假使它在圣堂里面，它会在什么地方？”
“即使里面真有一个，我也无法告诉你什么，我只在小时候进去过。”
“你可知道里面是否有个特别的地方，一个隐秘的场所？”
“有个长老阁，只有长老才能去，可是那里什么也没有。”
“你去过那里吗？”
“没有，当然没有。”
“那你又怎么知道？”
“我不知道那里没有石榴树，我不知道那里没有激光风琴，我不知道那里没有一百万种东西。我不知道它们不存在，是否代表它们全都存在？”
一时之间，谢顿无言以对。
菌丝七二忧虑的脸上闪过一丝飘忽的笑容。他说：“那是学者的论证方式，你看，我不是个容易对付的人。无论如何，我还是建议你别试图上长老阁去。如果他们在里面发现一个外族人，我想你不会喜欢那种后果。好啦，愿黎明与你同在。”
他突然起身——毫无预示——然后匆匆离去。
谢顿望着他的背影，心中感到相当惊讶：“什么东西把他吓得落荒而逃？”
“我想，”铎丝说，“是因为有人来了。”
的确有人来了。那人身材高大，穿着一件精致的白色裰服，斜挂着一条更为精致而且隐隐生辉的红色肩带。他踏着严肃的步伐走近他们，脸上显现出不容置疑的权威，以及更加不容置疑的不悦神色。
Chapter 53

Hari Seldon rose as the new Mycogenian approached. He hadnt the slightest idea whether that was the appropriate polite behavior, but he had the distinct feeling it would do no harm. Dors Venabili rose with him and carefully kept her eyes lowered.
The other stood before them. He too was an old man, but more subtly aged than Mycelium Seventy-Two. Age seemed to lend distinction to his still-handsome face. His bald head was beautifully round and his eyes were a startling blue, contrasting sharply with the bright all-but-glowing red of his sash.
The newcomer said, "I see you are tribespeople." His voice was more high-pitched than Seldon had expected, but he spoke slowly, as though conscious of the weight of authority in every word he uttered.
"So we are," said Seldon politely but firmly. He saw no reason not to defer to the others position, but he did not intend to abandon his own.
"Your names?"
"I am Hari Seldon of Helicon. My companion is Dors Venabili of Cinna. And yours, man of Mycogen?"
The eyes narrowed in displeasure, but he too could recognize an air of authority when he felt it.
"I am Skystrip Two," he said, lifting his head higher, "an Elder of the Sacratorium. And your position, tribesman?"
"We," said Seldon, emphasizing the pronoun, "are scholars of Streeling University. I am a mathematician and my companion is a historian and we are here to study the ways of Mycogen."
"By whose authority?"
"By that of Sunmaster Fourteen, who greeted us on our arrival."
Skystrip Two fell silent for a moment and then a small smile appeared on his face and he took on an air that was almost benign. He said, "The High Elder. I know him well."
"And so you should," said Seldon blandly. "Is there anything else, Elder?"
"Yes." The Elder strove to regain the high ground. "Who was the man who was with you and who hurried away when I approached?"
Seldon shook his head, "We never saw him before, Elder, and know nothing about him. We encountered him purely by accident and asked about the Sacratorium."
"What did you ask him?"
"Two questions, Elder. We asked if that building was the Sacratorium and if tribespeople were allowed to enter it. He answered in the affirmative to the first question and in the negative to the second."
"Quite so. And what is your interest in the Sacratorium?"
"Sir, we are here to study the ways of Mycogen and is not the Sacratorium the heart and brain of Mycogen?"
"It is entirely ours and reserved for us."
"Even if an Elder--the High Elder--would arrange for permission in view of our scholarly function?"
"Have you indeed the High Elders permission?"
Seldon hesitated the slightest moment while Dorss eyes lifted briefly to look at him sideways. He decided he could not carry off a lie of this magnitude. "No," he said, "not yet."
"Or ever," said the Elder. "You are here in Mycogen by authority, but even the highest authority cannot exert total control over the public. We value our Sacratorium and the populace can easily grow excited over the presence of a tribesperson anywhere in Mycogen but, most particularly, in the vicinity of the Sacratorium. It would take one excitable person to raise a cry of Invasion! and a peaceful crowd such as this one would be turned into one that would be thirsting to tear you apart. I mean that quite literally. For your own good, even if the High Elder has shown you kindness, leave. Now!"
"But the Sacratorium--" said Seldon stubbornly, though Dors was pulling gently at his kirtle.
"What is there in the Sacratorium that can possibly interest you?" said the Elder. "You see it now. There is nothing for you to see in the interior."
"There is the robot," said Seldon.
The Elder stared at Seldon in shocked surprise and then, bending to bring his lips close to Seldons ear, whispered harshly, "Leave now or I will raise the cry of Invasion! myself. Nor, were it not for the High Elder, would I give you even this one chance to leave."
And Dors, with surprising strength, nearly pulled Seldon off his feet as she stepped hastily away, dragging him along until he caught his balance and stepped quickly after her.

第五十三章
　　那位麦曲生人一走近，哈里•谢顿便站起来。至于这是不是适宜的礼貌举动，他心中没有丝毫概念，不过他很清楚地知道，这样做并无任何害处。铎丝•凡纳比里跟着他起身，小心翼翼地保持着下垂的目光。
对方站在他们两人前面。他也是一名老者，却比菌丝七二更不容易看出年龄。
岁月似乎使他依然英俊的脸庞显得更高贵。他的光头浑圆美观，眼珠是惊人的湛蓝色，与亮得几乎冒火的红色肩带形成强烈对比。
来人说道：“我看得出你们是外族人。”他的声音比谢顿预料中更为高亢，不过他说得很慢，仿佛意识到吐出的每个字都具有权威。
“我们的确是。”谢顿以客气而坚定的语气说。他看不出有任何理由不该尊重对方，却也没打算委屈自己。
“你们的姓名？”
“我是来自赫利肯的哈里•谢顿，我的同伴是来自锡纳的铎丝•凡纳比里。你呢，麦曲生的先生？”
那人不悦地眯起眼睛，不过他也感受到了对方的威严态度。
“我是天纹二，”他将头抬高一些，“圣堂的长老之一。你的身份为何，外族男子？”
“我们，”谢顿刻意强调这个代名词，“是川陀大学的学者。我是个数学家，我的同伴是历史学家，我们前来研究麦曲生的风土民情。”
“经由谁的许可？”
“经由日主十四的许可，我们抵达时他曾亲自迎接。”
天纹二陷入沉默好一会儿，然后他脸上出现几分笑容，态度几乎变得和蔼可亲起来。他说：“元老啊，我跟他很熟。”
“理当如此，”谢顿以温和的语气说，“还有什么事吗，长老？”
“是的。”这位长老极力想要扳回优势，“刚才跟你们在一起，当我走近时匆匆离去的是谁？”
谢顿摇了摇头。“我们以前从未见过他，长老，对他一无所知。我们遇到他纯粹是巧合，只是向他询问有关圣堂的事。”
“你问他些什么？”
“两个问题，长老。我们问这座建筑是不是圣堂，还有它是否准许外族人进入。他对第一个问题的回答是肯定的，第二个则是否定的。”
“相当正确。你对圣堂哪方面还有兴趣？”
“阁下，我们来此是要研究麦曲生的风土民情。圣堂难道不是麦曲生的大脑和心脏吗？”
“它完全是我们的，专门保留给我们。”
“若是某位长老或元老，看在我们做学问的分上，而特许我们进去呢？”
“你真得到元老的许可了吗？”
谢顿迟疑了一下，铎丝抬起眼帘，迅速从旁望了他一眼。他判定自己无法扯这么大的谎，于是说：“不，还没有。”
“或者永远不会。”这位长老说，“你们虽然获得许可来麦曲生，可是就连最高当局也无法绝对控制民众。我们珍惜我们的圣堂——不论在麦曲生哪个角落出现一个外族人，都很容易引起大众的激动情绪，尤其是在圣堂附近。只要有个容易冲动的人高喊一声‘侵略！’像这样一群平和的群众就会变成一群猛兽，非得将你碎尸万段才肯罢休，我这样说绝不夸张。即使元老待你很亲善，为了你自己好，你还是走吧。立刻！”
“可是圣堂……”谢顿继续顽固地说，不过铎丝却在轻扯他的裰服。
“圣堂里面究竟有什么能引起你的兴趣？”那位长老说，“现在你已经看到它了，里面没有任何值得你看的东西。”
“有个机仆。”谢顿说。
长老惊骇万分地瞪着谢顿。然后他弯下腰来，将嘴巴凑到谢顿的耳边，严厉地悄声说道：“立刻离开，否则我会自己高喊那声‘侵略！’要不是看在元老的分上，我甚至连这个机会都不会给你。”
此时铎丝展现惊人的力量，拉着谢顿急步离去，几乎使他站立不稳。她一路拖着他前进，直到他恢复平衡，快步跟在她后面为止。
Chapter 54
It was over breakfast the next morning, not sooner, that Dors took up the subject--and in a way that Seldon found most wounding. She said, "Well, that was a pretty fiasco yesterday."
Seldon, who had honestly thought he had gotten away with it without comment, looked sullen. "What made it a fiasco?"
"Driven out is what we were. And for what? What did we gain?"
"Only the knowledge that there is a robot in there."
"Mycelium Seventy-Two said there wasnt."
"Of course he said that. Hes a scholar--or thinks he is--and what he doesnt know about the Sacratorium would probably fill that library he goes to. You saw the Elders reaction."
"I certainly did."
"He would not have reacted like that if there was no robot inside. He was horrified we knew."
"Thats just your guess, Hari. And even if there was, we couldnt get in."
"We could certainly try. After breakfast, we go out and buy a sash for me, one of those obiahs. I put it on, keep my eyes devoutly downward, and walk right in."
"Skincap and all? Theyll spot you in a microsecond."
"No, they wont. Well go into the library where all the tribespeople data is kept. Id like to see it anyway. From the library, which is a Sacratorium annex, I gather, there will probably be an entrance into the Sacratorium."
"Where you will be picked up at once."
"Not at all. You heard what Mycelium Seventy-Two had to say. Everyone keeps his eyes down and meditates on their great Lost World, Aurora. No one looks at anyone else. It would probably be a grievous breach of discipline to do so. Then Ill find the Elders aerie--"
"Just like that?"
"At one point, Mycelium Seventy-Two said he would advise me not to try to get up into the Elders aerie. Up. It must be somewhere in that tower of the Sacratorium, the central tower."
Dors shook her head. "I dont recall the mans exact words and I dont think you do either. Thats a terribly weak foundation to-- Wait." She stopped suddenly and frowned.
"Well?" said Seldon.
"There is an archaic word aerie that means a dwelling place on high. "
"Ah! There you are. You see, weve learned some vital things as the result of what you call a fiasco. And if I can find a living robot thats twenty thousand years old and if it can tell me--"
"Suppose that such a thing exists, which passes belief, and that you find it, which is not very likely, how long do you think you will be able to talk to it before your presence is discovered?"
"I dont know, but if I can prove it exists and if I can find it, then Ill think of some way to talk to it. Its too late for me to back out now under any circumstances. Hummin should have left me alone when I thought there was no way of achieving psychohistory. Now that it seems there may be, I wont let anything stop me--short of being killed."
"The Mycogenians may oblige, Hari, and you cant run that risk."
"Yes, I can. Im going to try."
"No, Hari. I must look after you and I cant let you."
"You must let me. Finding a way to work out psychohistory is more important than my safety. My safety is only important because I may work out psychohistory. Prevent me from doing so and your task loses its meaning.--Think about it."
Hari felt himself infused with a renewed sense of purpose. Psychohistory--his nebulous theory that he had, such a short while ago, despaired ever of proving--loomed larger, more real. Now he had to believe that it was possible; he could feel it in his gut. The pieces seemed to be falling together and although he couldnt see the whole pattern yet, he was sure the Sacratorium would yield another piece to the puzzle.
"Then Ill go in with you so I can pull you out, you idiot, when the time comes."
"Women cant enter."
"What makes me a woman? Only this gray kirtle. You cant see my breasts under it. I dont have a womans style hairdo with the skincap on. I have the same washed, unmarked face a man has. The men here dont have stubble. All I need is a white kirtle and a sash and I can enter. Any Sister could do it if she wasnt held back by a taboo. I am not held back by one."
"Youre held back by me. I wont let you. Its too dangerous."
"No more dangerous for me than for you."
"But I must take the risk."
"Then so must I. Why is your imperative greater than mine?"
"Because--" Seldon paused in thought.
"Just tell yourself this," said Dors, her voice hard as rock. "I wont let you go there without me. If you try, I will knock you unconscious and tie you up. If you dont like that, then give up any thought of going alone."
Seldon hesitated and muttered darkly. He gave up the argument, at least for now.
第五十四章
　　一夜无话，直到第二天上午吃早餐的时候，铎丝才重拾这个话题——用的是谢顿感到最伤人的说法。
她说：“唉，昨天真是一败涂地。”
谢顿面色凝重，他原本以为已躲过批判：“为什么说一败涂地？”
“我们的下场是被轰出来。为了什么？我们又得到些什么？”
“我们只知道那里面有个机器人。”
“菌丝七二说没这回事。”
“他当然那样说。他是个学者，或者自认为是个学者。有关圣堂的点点滴滴，他不知道的也许能装满他常去的那间图书馆。你看到那个长老的反应了。”
“当然看到了。”
“假使里面没有机器人，他不会有那种反应。我们的情报把他吓坏了。”
“那只是你的猜想，哈里。即使真有其事，我们也无法进去。”
“我们可以试一试。吃完早餐我们就出去，先买一条肩带，就是所谓的和带。我把它挂在身上，目光保持虔敬地向下，就这样走进去。”
“人皮帽和其他一切呢？他们会在一微秒内认出你来。”
“不，他们不会的。我们先走进那间保存外族人数据的图书馆，反正我也想去看看。那间图书馆是圣堂的附属建筑，我推测里而或许有进入圣堂的入口……”
“你进圣堂后会立刻遭到逮捕。”
“绝对不会。你也听到菌丝七二是怎么说的，每个人都保持目光向下，冥思他们那个伟大的失落世界奥罗拉。没有人会望向其他人，说不定那是严重违反戒律的行为。然后，我就能找到长老阁……”
“那么答易？”
“在谈话中，菌丝七二曾说建议我别试图上长老阁去。‘上’！它一定是在圣堂的高塔中，那个中央高塔。”
铎丝摇了摇头：“我不确定那人使用的是哪些字眼，我想你也记不清了。那实在是太过微弱的根据……慢着。”她突然打住，同时皱起眉头。
“怎么了？”谢顿说。
“有个古老的字眼‘阁’，意思是位于高处的住所。”
“啊！我就说吧。你看，从你所谓的一败涂地中，我们获悉了一些重要的事。如果我能找到一个已经两万岁的活生生的机器人，如果它能告诉我……”
“假设这种东西果真存在——这已经难以置信；再假设你能找到它——这又是不大可能的事。在这两个前提下，你认为在自己的行踪被人发现之前，可以跟它谈多久？”
“我不知道。可是如果我能证明它存在，如果我又能找到它，那我总会想办法和它交谈。如今不论在任何情况下，我想打退堂鼓都为时已晚。在我认为心理史学根本无法建立时，夫铭就该放我一马。现在似乎有了眉目，任何事物都无法阻止我——除非将我杀了。”
“麦曲生人可能会被迫那样做，哈里。你不能冒这种险。”
“不，我可以冒险，我要去试试看。”
“不，哈里。我必须照顾你，我不能让你去。”
“你一定要让我去。找到一个建立心理史学的方法，比我自身的安全更为重要。我的安全之所以重要，是因为我或许能建立心理史学。若是阻止我这么做，你的工作就失去意义——好好想一想。”
谢顿觉得一股全新的使命感自体内升起。心理史学——他那模糊不清的理论，不久之前，他还认为绝无成功的希望——隐隐约约变得越来越大，越来越真实。现在，他必须相信它是可能的，他打心眼里感觉得到。拼图的碎片似乎开始聚在一起，虽然他还无法看出整体图样，然而，他确定圣堂能够提供另一块碎片。
“我要和你一起进去，这样我才能及时将你这个白痴拉出来。”
“女人是不准入内的。”
“什么东西让我看来像个女人？只是这件裰服罢了。穿着这种服装，你看不见我的胸部；戴上人皮帽之后，我头上也小再有女人的发型。我的脸洗得干干净净，未施任何脂粉，跟男人没什么两样，而且这里的男人连短髭都没有。我需要的只是一件白色裰服和一条肩带，然后我就可以进去。要不是受到禁忌的限制，每位姐妹都能这么做，我可不受任何禁忌限制。”
“你受我的限制，我不让你那样做，太危险了。”
“对我和对你一样危险。”
“但我一定要冒这个盼。”
“那么我也一样，为什么你的命令胜过我的？”
“因为……”谢顿突然住口，陷入沉思之中。
“你不如这样想，”铎丝的语气坚如磐石，“我不会让你不带我同去，假如你想尝试，我会把你打昏，再把你绑起来。若是你不喜欢那样，就别再有独自前往的念头。”
谢顿迟疑不决，闷闷不乐地嘀咕了几句。他放弃了争论，至少暂时如此。
Chapter 55
The sky was almost cloudless, but it was a pale blue, as though wrapped in a high thin mist. That, thought Seldon, was a good touch, but suddenly he missed the sun itself. No one on Trantor saw the planets sun unless he or she went Upperside and even then only when the natural cloud layer broke. Did native Trantorians miss the sun? Did they give it any thought? When one of them visited another world where a natural sun was in view, did he or she stare, half-blinded, at it with awe?
Why, he wondered, did so many people spend their lives not trying to find answers to questions--not even thinking of questions to begin with? Was there anything more exciting in life than seeking answers?
His glance shifted to ground level. The wide roadway was lined with low buildings, most of them shops. Numerous individual ground-cars moved in both directions, each hugging the right side. They seemed like a collection of antiques, but they were electrically driven and quite soundless. Seldon wondered if "antique" was always a word to sneer at. Could it be that silence made up for slowness? Was there any particular hurry to life, after all?
There were a number of children on the walkways and Seldons lips pressed together in annoyance. Clearly, an extended life span for the Mycogenians was impossible unless they were willing to indulge in infanticide. The children of both sexes (though it was hard to tell the boys from the girls) wore kirtles that came only a few inches below the knee, making the wild activity of childhood easier.
The children also still had hair, reduced to an inch in length at most, but even so the older ones among them had hoods attached to their kirtles and wore them raised, hiding the top of the head altogether. It was as though they were getting old enough to make the hair seem a trifle obscene--or old enough to be wishing to hide it, in longing for the day of rite of passage when they were depilated.
A thought occurred to Seldon. He said, "Dors, when youve been out shopping, who paid, you or the Raindrop women?"
"I did of course. The Raindrops never produced a credit tile. But why should they? What was being bought was for us, not for them."
"But you have a Trantorian credit tile--a tribeswoman credit tile."
"Of course, Hari, but there was no problem. The people of Mycogen may keep their own culture and ways of thought and habits of life as they wish. They can destroy their cephalic hair and wear kirtles. Nevertheless, they must use the worlds credits. If they dont, that would choke off commerce and no sensible person would want to do that. The credits nerve, Hari." She held up her hand as though she was holding an invisible credit tile.
"And they accepted your credit tile?"
"Never a peep out of them. And never a word about my skincap. Credits sanitize everything."
"Well, thats good. So I can buy--"
"No, Ill do the buying. Credits may sanitize everything, but they more easily sanitize a tribeswoman. Theyre so used to paying women little or no attention that they automatically pay me the same.--And heres the clothing store Ive been using."
"Ill wait out here. Get me a nice red sash--one that looks impressive."
"Dont pretend youve forgotten our decision. Ill get two. And another white kirtle also ... to my measurements."
"Wont they think it odd that a woman would be buying a white kirtle?"
"Of course not. Theyll assume Im buying it for a male companion who happens to be my size. Actually, I dont think theyll bother with any assumptions at all as long as my credit tile is good."
Seldon waited, half-expecting someone to come up and greet him as a tribesman or denounce him as one--more likely--but no one did. Those who passed him did so without a glance and even those who glanced in his direction moved on seemingly untouched. He was especially nervous about the gray kirtles--the women--walking by in pairs or, even worse, with a man. They were downtrodden, unnoticed, snubbed. How better to gain a brief notoriety than by shrieking at the sight of a tribesman? But even the women moved on.
Theyre not expecting to see a tribesman, Seldon thought, so they dont see one.
That, he decided, augured well for their forthcoming invasion of the Sacratorium. How much less would anyone expect to see tribespeople there and how much more effectively would they therefore fail to see them! He was in fairly good humor when Dors emerged.
"You have everything?"
"Absolutely."
"Then lets go back to the room, so you can change." The white kirtle did not fit her quite as well as the gray one did. Obviously, she could not have tried it on or even the densest shopkeeper would have been struck with alarm.
"How do I look, Hari?" she asked.
"Exactly like a boy," said Seldon. "Now lets try the sash ... or obiah. I had better get used to calling it that."
Dors, without her skincap, was shaking out her hair gratefully. She said sharply, "Dont put it on now. Were not going to parade through Mycogen with the sash on. The last thing we want to do is call attention to ourselves."
"No, no. I just want to see how it goes on."
"Well, not that one. This one is better quality and more elaborate."
"Youre right, Dors. Ive got to gather in what attention there is. I dont want them to detect you as a woman."
"Im not thinking of that, Hari. I just want you to look pretty."
"A thousand thanks, but thats impossible, I suspect. Now, lets see, how does this work?"
Together, Hari and Dors practiced putting their obiahs on and taking them off, over and over again, until they could do it in one fluid motion. Dors taught Hari how to do it, as she had seen a man doing it the day before at the Sacratorium.
When Hari praised her for her acute observations, she blushed and said, "Its really nothing, Hari, just something I noticed."
Hari replied, "Then youre a genius for noticing."
Finally satisfied, they stood well apart, each surveying the other. Haris obiah glittered, a bright red dragonlike design standing out against a paler field of similar hue. Dorss was a little less bold, had a simple thin line down the center, and was very light in color.
"There," she said, "just enough to show good taste." She took it off.
"Now," said Seldon, "we fold it up and it goes into one of the inner pockets. I have my credit tile--Hummins, really--and the key to this place in this one and here, on the other side, the Book."
"The Book? Should you be carrying it around?"
"I must. Im guessing that anyone going to the Sacratorium ought to have a copy of the Book with him. They may intone passages or have readings. If necessary, well share the Book and maybe no one will notice. Ready?"
"Ill never be ready, but Im going with you."
"It will be a tedious trip. Will you check my skincap and make sure no hair shows this time? And dont scratch your head."
"I wont. You look all right."
"So do you."
"You also look nervous."
And Seldon said wryly, "Guess why!"
Dors reached out impulsively and squeezed Haris hand, then drew back as if surprised at herself. Looking down, she straightened her white kirtle.
Hari, himself a trifle surprised and peculiarly pleased, cleared his throat and said, "Okay, lets go."
Aerie
ROBOT-- ... A term used in the ancient legends of several worlds for what are more usually called "automata." Robots are described as generally human in shape and made of metal, although some are supposed to have been pseudo-organic in nature. Hari Seldon, in the course of The Flight, is popularly supposed to have seen an actual robot, but that story is of dubious origin. Nowhere in Seldons voluminous writings does he mention robots at all, although ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第五十五章
　　天空几乎万里无云，但天色却是灰蓝色的，仿佛罩在一片高层轻雾中。多美好的画面，谢顿心想，不过他忽然又怀念起太阳。川陀上的人都无法看见太阳，除非他们前往穹顶上，而且即便如此，也必须等到自然云层裂出一道缝。
土生土长的川陀人是否怀念太阳？他们是否想到过它？当他们访问其他世界，抬头便能望见真实的太阳之际，他们是否带着敬畏的心情，凝视着那个炫目的火球？
他感到纳闷，为何那么多人过着庸庸碌碌的日子，从未试图找出许多问题的答案，甚至根本未曾想到那些问题？人生难道还有什么事情，比寻找答案更令人感到振奋？
他又将视线移到水平线上。宽广的道路两侧排列着低矮的建筑，其中大多数是商店。来来往往的个人地面车为数众多，每一辆都紧贴着右侧。它们似乎像一批古董，不过都是电力驱动的，而且几乎安静无声。谢顿不禁怀疑，“古董”难道总是值得嘲笑的词吗？安静是否能弥补慢速的缺点？毕竟，人生又有什么特别需要赶场的呢？
看到人行道上有些儿童，谢顿在心烦意乱中抿紧嘴唇。显然，麦曲生人不可能拥有超长的寿命，除非他们愿意大肆进行杀婴的举动。两种性别的儿童（虽然很难分辨男孩与女孩）都穿着裰服，长度仅达膝盖以下数寸，好让孩童狂放的活动方便些。
那些儿童也都还有头发，顶多不超过两厘米。不过即使如此，较大的儿童在裰服上一律附有兜帽，而且都把它拉上，将头顶完全遮起来。仿佛他们的年龄已经不小，足以使头发看来有点淫秽之意；或者是年龄已经够大，主动希望将头发遮掩，并渴望脱毛手术的成年礼早日来临。
谢顿突然闪过一个念头。他说：“铎丝，你去购物的时候由谁付账，是你还是雨点姐妹？”
“当然是我，雨点姐妹从未掏出信用磁卡。但是她们应该那样做吗？买的东西全是给我们用的，又不是给她们的。”
“但你拥有的是一张川陀信用磁卡，外族女子的信用磁卡。”
“当然，哈里，可是根本没有问题。麦曲生人或许如愿地保持着独有的文化、思考模式和生活习惯，他们可以毁弃头部毛发，并且一律穿着裰服。然而，他们必须使用世界通用的信用点。他们若是拒绝，那会扼杀一切的商业活动，任何理智的人都不会那么做。信用点能使人见钱眼开，哈里。”她举起一只手，仿佛正握着一张隐形信用磁卡。
“所以他们接受你的信用磁卡？”
“他们连看都没看我一眼，对我的人皮帽也从来不予评价。信用点消除了一切疑虑。”
“嗯，那很好。所以我也能买……”
“不，由我来买。信用点或许能消除一切疑虑，但更容易消除对一名外族女子的疑虑。他们习惯了对女性不太注意或毫不注意，所以自然而然对我一视同仁——这家就是我曾经光顾的服装店。”
“我在外面等，帮我买一条好看的红肩带——特别引人注目的。”
“你别假装忘了我们的决定。我会买两条，还会再买一件白色裰服……符合我的尺寸的。”
“一个女人想买一件白色裰服，他们不会认为奇怪吗？”
“当然不会。他们会认为我是帮一位男伴买的，而他的身材刚好和我一样。事实上，只要我的信用磁卡没问题，我想他们根本懒得做任何判定。”
于是谢顿开始等待，心里多少盼望着有人跟他这个外族人打招呼，或者公然抨击他这个外族人——后者其实更有可能，结果这两种人皆末出现。在他面前经过的人都没看他一眼，甚至那些曾朝这个方向望来的人，也似乎无动于衷地继续前进。尤其让他敏感的是那些灰色裰服——那些成双成对行走的女性，而身边有个男伴的更糟。她们是属于受到压制、遭到冷落、不被重视的一群。还有什么举动，比看到一个外族男子后尖叫一声更能引起短暂的侧目？可是就连女性也对他不屑一顾。
他们并未预期看到外族人，谢顿想，所以他们视而不见。
对于两人即将入侵圣堂的行动，他认定这是个好兆头。在那里更不会有人预期见到外族人，因此将对他们两人更加熟视尤睹！
铎丝出来的时候，谢顿的心情相当好。
“买齐了吗？”
“一样不缺。”
“那么我们回去吧，好让你换衣服。”
新买的白色裰服不如灰色那件合身。显然她刚才根本不能试穿，否则即使最愚钝的店主都会吓得不知如何是好。
“我看来怎么样，哈里？”她问道。
“跟一个男生一模一样。”谢顿说，“现在让我们试试肩带……或者该说和带，我最好习惯这样称呼它。”
未戴人皮帽的铎丝正心满意足地甩着头发。她突然说：“不要现在就戴上，我们不准备披挂着肩带游行麦曲生。引人注意是我们最不愿发生的事。”
“不，不。我只是想看看是否合身。”
“好吧，不是那条。这条的质量比较好，而且比较精致。”
“你说得对，铎丝。我必须吸引所有的注意，我不想让他们察觉你是女的。”
“我不是那个意思，哈里，我只是要你看来帅气。”
“感激不尽，但我怀疑那是不可能的。现在，让我们想想看，这究竟该怎样穿戴。”
谢顿与铎丝两人一起练习戴上、摘下和带的动作，试了一次又一次，直到能以流畅的动作一气呵成为止。这回由铎丝担任谢顿的老师，因为昨天她曾在圣堂外看到一名男子的全程动作。
当谢顿称赞她具有敏锐观察力的时候，她红着脸说：“这实在没什么，哈里，不过是我观察到的一件事。”
谢顿答道：“那么，你就是个观察力过人的天才。”
练得纯熟满意之后，他们彼此站得老远，互相审视着对方的穿着。谢顿的和带闪闪发亮，有个鲜红的龙形图案浮现在较淡的同色调背景上。铎丝那条的设计没那么大胆，仅在中央处点缀着一条简单的细纹，而且色调非常浅。“这样，”她说，“足以显示我们的品位不俗。”说完她就将它摘下。
“现在，”谢顿说，“我们把它折叠起来，放进其中一个内袋里。我的信用磁卡——其实是夫铭的——和此地的钥匙在这个内袋，而这里，另一边的内袋是那本典籍。”
“典籍？你要带着它到处跑吗？”
“我必须这么做。我猜任何进入圣堂的人都该随身携带一本典籍，他们可能会吟咏或齐声朗读其中的章句。假使有必要，我们就共享这本典籍，或许没有人会注意到。准备好了吗？”
“准备好是不可能的，但我会跟你一起去。”
“这将是个沉闷的旅程。能否请你检查一下我的人皮帽，确定这次没有头发露出来？记着别抓你的头。”
“我不会的，你看来一切正常。”
“你也是。”
“你看来还有点紧张兮兮。”
谢顿以挖苦的口气说：“猜猜为什么！”
铎丝冲动地伸出手去，紧紧握住谢顿的手，却赶紧抽回来，好像对自己的举动感到惊讶。然后她低下头，将身上的白色裰服拉直。
谢顿自己也有点惊讶，心中又特别高兴，他清了清喉咙，说道：“好啦，我们走吧。”
Chapter 56

They were not noticed.
Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili repeated the trip of the day before and this time no one gave them a second look. Hardly anyone even gave them a first look. On several occasions, they had to tuck their knees to one side to allow someone sitting on an inner seat to get past them and out. When someone got in, they quickly realized they had to move over if there was an inner empty seat. This time they quickly grew tired of the smell of kirtles that were not freshly laundered because they were not so easily diverted by what went on outside. But eventually they were there.
"Thats the library," said Seldon in a low voice.
"I suppose so," said Dors. "At least thats the building that Mycelium Seventy-Two pointed out yesterday."
They sauntered toward it leisurely.
"Take a deep breath," said Seldon. "This is the first hurdle."
The door ahead was open, the light within subdued. There were five broad stone steps leading upward. They stepped onto the lowermost one and waited several moments before they realized that their weight did not cause the steps to move upward. Dors grimaced very slightly and gestured Seldon upward. Together they walked up the stairs, feeling embarrassed on behalf of Mycogen for its backwardness.
Then, through a door, where, at a desk immediately inside was a man bent over the simplest and clumsiest computer Seldon had ever seen. The man did not look up at them. No need, Seldon supposed. White kirtle, bald head--all Mycogenians looked so nearly the same that ones eyes slid off them and that was to the tribespeoples advantage at the moment.
The man, who still seemed to be studying something on the desk, said, "Scholars?"
"Scholars," said Seldon.
The man jerked his head toward a door. "Go in. Enjoy."
They moved inward and, as nearly as they could see, they were the only ones in this section of the library. Either the library was not a popular resort or the scholars were few or--most likely--both.
Seldon whispered, "I thought surely we would have to present some sort of license or permission form and I would have to plead having forgotten it."
"He probably welcomes our presence under any terms. Did you ever see a place like this? If a place, like a person, could be dead, we would be inside a corpse."
Most of the books in this section were print-books like the Book in Seldons inner pocket. Dors drifted along the shelves, studying them. She said, "Old books, for the most part. Part classic. Part worthless."
"Outside books? Non-Mycogen, I mean?"
"Oh yes. If they have their own books, they must be kept in another section. This one is for outside research for poor little self-styled scholars like yesterdays.--This is the reference department and heres an Imperial Encyclopedia ... must be fifty years old if a day ... and a computer." She reached for the keys and Seldon stopped her.
"Wait. Something could go wrong and well be delayed."
He pointed to a discreet sign above a free-standing set of shelves that glowed with the letters TO THE SACR TORIUM. The second A in SACRATORIUM was dead, possibly recently or possibly because no one cared. (The Empire, thought Seldon, was in decay. All parts of it. Mycogen too.)
He looked about. The poor library, so necessary to Mycogenian pride, perhaps so useful to the Elders who could use it to find crumbs to shore up their own beliefs and present them as being those of sophisticated tribespeople, seemed to be completely empty. No one had entered after them.
Seldon said, "Lets step in here, out of eyeshot of the man at the door, and put on our sashes."
And then, at the door, aware suddenly there would be no turning back if they passed this second hurdle, he said, "Dors, dont come in with me."
She frowned. "Why not?"
"Its not safe and I dont want you to be at risk."
"I am here to protect you," she said with soft firmness.
"What kind of protection can you be? I can protect myself, though you may not think it. And Id be handicapped by having to protect you. Dont you see that?"
"You mustnt be concerned about me, Hari," said Dors. "Concern is my part." She tapped her sash where it crossed in the space between her obscured breasts.
"Because Hummin asked you to?"
"Because those are my orders."
She seized Seldons arms just above his elbow and, as always, he was surprised by her firm grip. She said, "Im against this, Hari, but if you feel you must go in, then I must go in too."
"All right, then. But if anything happens and you can wriggle out of it, run. Dont worry about me."
"Youre wasting your breath, Hari. And youre insulting me."
Seldon touched the entrance panel and the portal slid open. Together, almost in unison, they walked through.

第五十六章
第十二部 长老阁
机仆：……与较通行名称“机器人”同义。这个字汇存在于数个世界的古代传说中。
根据记载，机仆一般皆由金属制成，外形酷似人类，不过据说有些机仆的材料为假有机物质。
盛传哈里•谢顿在“逃亡期”中，曾亲眼见到一个真正的机仆。但此轶闻的来源并不可靠。在谢顿浩瀚的著作中．从未提到任何机仆。
不过……
——《银河百科全书》


第五十六章
没有人注意他们。
哈里•谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里重复着昨日的行程，这次没有任何人看他们第二眼，甚至几乎没人看他们一眼。车子好几次靠站的时候，他们必须将膝盖偏向一侧，好让坐在内侧的人走出来。而在有人上车之后，如果内侧还有空位，他们立刻明白应该向内移动。
这一回，他们很快就受不了久未洗涤的裰服发出的气味，因为他们不再那么容易被车外的事物吸引。
无论如何，他们总算抵达了目的地。
“那就是图书馆。”谢顿低声说道。
“我想没错，”铎丝说，“它就是菌丝七二昨天指的那栋建筑。”
他们以悠闲的步伐朝它走去。
“深呼吸一下，”谢顿说，“这是第一道关卡。”
前面的门开着，里面的光线柔和暗淡，门前共有五级宽阔的石阶。他们踏上最低一级，等了好一会儿，才了解他们的重量并未使阶梯上升。铎丝做了一个很小的鬼脸，以手势示意谢顿往上走。
当他们一起走上阶梯时，都为这种落后替麦曲生感到难为情。然后，他们走进一道门，室内近门处摆着一张办公桌，有个男的伏在一台计算机上，那是谢顿见过的最简单、最粗陋的计算机。
那个男的并未抬头看他们。没有必要，谢顿这么想。白色的裰服，光秃的头颅——所有麦曲生人看来几乎都差不多，眼光扫过不会留下任何印象。而在这个节骨眼上，这点成了外族人的有利因素。
那人似乎仍在研究桌上的什么东西。“学者吗？”他问。
“学者。”谢顿答道。
那人突然将头朝一扇门摆了摆：“进去吧，尽情研究。”
他们进去后，在两人目力所极的范围内，他们是图书馆这一区仅有的两个人。
若非这间图书馆不是个热门去处，就是学者为数极少，而更有可能的情况，则是两者同时成立。
谢顿悄声说道：“我本来以为我们得出示某种执照或许可文件，我准备辩称我忘了带。”
“也许不管我们怎么回答，他都会欢迎我们进来。你见过像这样的地方吗？如果地方像人一样也会死亡，那我们就正在一具尸体里面。”
这一区的图书大部分是印刷书，就像谢顿内袋中的那木典籍一样。
铎丝一面沿着书架游走，一面研究其上陈列的书籍。“古书，大多数都是。部分是经典名著，部分则一文不值。”
“外界的书籍——我的意思是说，非麦曲生的？”
“嗖，没错。如果他们有自己的书籍，那些书一定收藏存另一区。本区专供那些可怜的自命学者进行外界研究，比如说昨天那位——这是参考图书部，这里有一套‘帝国百科全书……它一定有五十年的历史，绝少不了……还有一台计算机。”
她伸手想要触动按键，谢顿却阻止她：“别碰它。万一再什么问题，我们会被耽搁。”
他指着一排独立书架上的一个精细标示，上面映着“往圣堂”几个闪亮的字体，其中“圣”字有些笔画暗淡无光，也许是最近才坏的，也可能是因为无人在意。（帝国正在哀败中，谢顿想道，每一部分皆是如此，麦曲生也不例外。）
他四下张望。这间简陋的图书馆对麦曲生的骄傲而言是如此重要不可或缺的一环；对长老们可能极为有用——他们得以从中找到只言片语，用来支撑他们的信仰。然而放眼望去，这里却空荡无人，也没有人跟在他们身后进来。
谢顿说：“让我们待在这里，避开门口那人的视野，把肩带戴上。”
在那扇门前，他突然意识到如果越过这第二道关卡，他们就再也无法回头。他说：“铎丝，别跟我进来。”
她皱起眉头：“为什么？”
“这不安全，我不要你身处险境。”
“我来这里就是要保护你。”她以温柔而坚定的口吻说。
“你能怎么保护我呢？或许你不以为然，但我可以保护自己。如果你在身边，我会为了保护你而缩手缩脚，这点你不明白吗？”
“你绝不要为我担心，哈里，”铎丝说，“担心是我的事。”她拍拍胸脯，落手处是横跨隐约双峰之间的肩带。
“因为夫铭要求你这么做？”
“因为这是我的使命。”
她伸出双手，抓住谢顿双臂。如同往常一样，她坚定的双手令他惊讶不已。她说：“我并不赞成这样做，哈里，但你若是觉得你一定要进去，那我也一定要跟进去。”
“既然这样，好吧！一旦如果发生任何事，而你能逃脱的话，那就赶快跑，不要顾及我。”
“你在白费口舌，哈里，而且你是在侮辱我。”
谢顿按了一下开启触板，那扇门便向一侧滑开。他们两人同时走进，动作几乎完全一致。
Chapter 57

A large room, all the larger because it was empty of anything resembling furniture. No chairs, no benches, no seats of any kind. No stage, no drapery, no decorations.
No lights, merely a uniform illumination of mild, unfocused light. The walls were not entirely blank. Periodically, arranged in spaced fashion at various heights and in no easy repetitive order, there were small, primitive, two-dimensional television screens, all of which were operating. From where Dors and Seldon stood, there was not even the illusion of a third dimension, not a breath of true holovision.
There were people present. Not many and nowhere together. They stood singly and, like the television monitors, in no easy repetitive order. All were white-kirtled, all sashed.
For the most part, there was silence. No one talked in the usual sense. Some moved their lips, murmuring softly. Those who walked did so stealthily, eyes downcast.
The atmosphere was absolutely funereal.
Seldon leaned toward Dors, who instantly put a finger to her lips, then pointed to one of the television monitors. The screen showed an idyllic garden bursting with blooms, the camera panning over it slowly. They walked toward the monitor in a fashion that imitated the others--slow steps, putting each foot down softly.
When they were within half a meter of the screen, a soft insinuating voice made itself heard: "The garden of Antennin, as reproduced from ancient guidebooks and photographs, located in the outskirts of Eos. Note the--"
Dors said in a whisper Seldon had trouble catching over the sound of the set, "It turns on when someone is close and it will turn off if we step away. If were close enough, we can talk under cover, but dont look at me and stop speaking if anyone approaches."
Seldon, his head bent, his hands clasped before him (he had noted that this was a preferred posture), said, "Any moment I expect someone to start wailing."
"Someone might. Theyre mourning their Lost World," said Dors.
"I hope they change the films every once in a while. It would be deadly to always see the same ones."
"Theyre all different," said Dors, her eyes sliding this way and that. "They may change periodically. I dont know."
"Wait!" said Seldon just a hairs breadth too loud. He lowered his voice and said, "Come this way."
Dors frowned, failing to make out the words, but Seldon gestured slightly with his head. Again the stealthy walk, but Seldons footsteps increased in length as he felt the need for greater speed and Dors, catching up, pulled sharply--if very briefly--at his kirtle. He slowed.
"Robots here," he said under the cover of the sound as it came on. The picture showed the corner of a dwelling place with a rolling lawn and a line of hedges in the foreground and three of what could only be described as robots. They were metallic, apparently, and vaguely human in shape.
The recording said, "This is a view, recently constructed, of the establishment of the famous Wendome estate of the third century. The robot you see near the center was, according to tradition, named Bendar and served twenty-two years, according to the ancient records, before being replaced."
Dors said, " Recently constructed, so they must change views."
"Unless theyve been saying recently constructed for the last thousand years."
Another Mycogenian stepped into the sound pattern of the scene and said in a low voice, though not as low as the whisperings of Seldon and Dors, "Greetings, Brothers."
He did not look at Seldon and Dors as he spoke and after one involuntary and startled glance, Seldon kept his head averted. Dors had ignored it all. Seldon hesitated. Mycelium Seventy-Two had said that there was no talking in the Sacratorium. Perhaps he had exaggerated. Then too he had not been in the Sacratorium since he was a child.
Desperately, Seldon decided he must speak. He said in a whisper, "And to you, Brother, greetings."
He had no idea whether that was the correct formula of reply or if there was a formula, but the Mycogenian seemed to find nothing amiss in it. "To you in Aurora," he said.
"And to you," said Seldon and because it seemed to him that the other expected more, he added, "in Aurora," and there was an impalpable release of tension. Seldon felt his forehead growing moist.
The Mycogenian said, "Beautiful! I havent seen this before."
"Skillfully done," said Seldon. Then, in a burst of daring, he added, "A loss never to be forgotten."
The other seemed startled, then said, "Indeed, indeed," and moved away.
Dors hissed, "Take no chances. Dont say what you dont have to."
"It seemed natural. Anyway, this it recent. But those are disappointing robots. They are what I would expect automata to be. I want to see the organic ones--the humanoids."
"If they existed," said Dors with some hesitation, "it seems to me they wouldnt be used for gardening jobs."
"True," said Seldon. "We must find the Elders aerie."
"If that exists. It seems to me there is nothing in this hollow cave but a hollow cave."
"Lets look."
They paced along the wall, passing from screen to screen, trying to wait at each for irregular intervals until Dors clutched Seldons arms. Between two screens were lines marking out a faint rectangle.
"A door," Dors said. Then she weakened the assertion by adding, "Do you think?"
Seldon looked about surreptitiously. It was in the highest degree convenient that, in keeping with the mourning atmosphere, every face, when not fixed on a television monitor, was bent in sad concentration on the floor.
Seldon said, "How do you suppose it would open?"
"An entrance patch."
"I cant make out any."
"Its just not marked out, but theres a slight discoloration there. Do you see it? How many palms? How many times?"
"Ill try. Keep an eye out and kick me if anyone looks in this direction."
He held his breath casually, touched the discolored spot to no avail, and then placed his palm full upon it and pressed.
The door opened silently--not a creak, not a scrape.
Seldon stepped through as rapidly as he could and Dors followed him. The door closed behind them.
"The question is," said Dors, "did anyone see us?"
Seldon said, "Elders must go through this door frequently."
"Yes, but will anyone think we are Elders?"
Seldon waited, then said, "If we were observed and if anyone thought something was wrong, this door would have been flung open again within fifteen seconds of our entering."
"Possibly," said Dors dryly, "or possibly there is nothing to be seen or done on this side of the door and no one cares if we enter."
"That remains to be seen," muttered Seldon.
The rather narrow room they had entered was somewhat dark, but as they stepped farther into it, the light brightened.
There were chairs, wide and comfortable, small tables, several davenports, a deep and tall refrigerator, cupboards.
"If this is the Elders aerie," said Seldon, "the Elders seem to do themselves comfortably, despite the austerity of the Sacratorium itself."
"As would be expected," said Dors. "Asceticism among a ruling class--except for public show--is very rare. Put that down in your notebook for psychohistorical aphorisms." She looked about. "And there is no robot."
Seldon said, "An aerie is a high position, remember, and this ceiling is not. There must be upper storeys and that must be the way." He pointed to a well-carpeted stairway.
He did not advance toward it, however, but looked about vaguely.
Dors guessed what he was seeking. She said, "Forget about elevators. Theres a cult of primitivism in Mycogen. Surely, you havent forgotten that, have you? There would be no elevators and, whats more, if we place our weight at the foot of the stairs, I am quite certain it will not begin moving upward. Were going to have to climb it. Several flights, perhaps."
"Climb it?"
"It must, in the nature of things, lead to the aerie--if it leads anywhere. Do you want to see the aerie or dont you?"
Together they stepped toward the staircase and began the climb. They went up three flights and, as they did, the light level decreased perceptibly and in steady increments. Seldon took a deep breath and whispered, "I consider myself to be in pretty good shape, but I hate this."
"Youre not used to this precise type of physical exertion." She showed no signs of physical distress whatever.
At the top of the third flight the stairs ended and before them was another door.
"And if its locked?" said Seldon, more to himself than to Dors. "Do we try to break it down?"
But Dors said, "Why should it be locked when the lower door was not? If this is the Elders aerie, I imagine theres a taboo on anyone but Elders coming here and a taboo is much stronger than any lock."
"As far as those who accept the taboo are concerned," said Seldon, but he made no move toward the door.
"Theres still time to turn back, since you hesitate," said Dors. "In fact, I would advise you to rum back."
"I only hesitate because I dont know what well find inside. If its empty--" And then he added in a rather louder voice, "Then its empty," and he strode forward and pushed against the entry panel.
The door retracted with silent speed and Seldon took a step back at the surprising flood of light from within.
And there, facing him, eyes alive with light, arms half-upraised, one foot slightly advanced before the other, gleaming with a faintly yellow metallic shine, was a human figure. For a few moments, it seemed to be wearing a tight-fitting tunic, but on closer inspection it became apparent that the tunic was part of the structure of the object.
"Its the robot," said Seldon in awe, "but its metallic."
"Worse than that," said Dors, who had stepped quickly to one side and then to the other. "Its eyes dont follow me. Its arms dont as much as tremble. Its not alive--if one can speak of robots as being alive." And a man--unmistakably a man--stepped out from behind the robot and said, "Perhaps not. But I am alive."
And almost automatically, Dors stepped forward and took her place between Seldon and the man who had suddenly appeared.
第五十七章
　　这是一间很大的房间，由于没有任何类似家具的陈设，因此显得更为宽敞。没有椅子，没有长凳，没有任何座位。也没有高台，没有帘幔，或任何的装饰。
没有灯光，只有均匀、柔和的漫射照明光线。四面墙壁并非全然空洞，上面嵌装着许多小型、原始的二维电视屏幕，而且全都开着。它们相互之间有固定的间隔，每个的高度都不尽相同，很难看出其中的规律。从铎丝与谢顿所站的位置，根本连三维的视觉都无法产生，更别提真正全息电视的影像效果。
那里已经有些人，人数不多，而且都没有聚在一块。他们零星站在各处，像那些电视显像器一样，很难看出他们之间的相关位置。每个人都身穿白色裰服，每个人都披挂着肩带。
大部分的时问，这里面安静无声。没有人以平常的方式说话，只有一些人蠕动着嘴唇，轻声地喃喃自语。走动的人都悄无声息，而且目光律朝下。
这种气氛简直与葬礼无异。
谢顿倾身凑向铎丝，她立刻将一根指头放在唇边，然后向其中一个电视显像器指了指。屏幕映出一个如诗如画、花朵盛开的花园，镜头正在缓缓移动，将全景一一呈现。
他们模仿其他人的方式，朝那个显像器走去——缓缓挪动脚步，每一步都轻轻放下。
当他们距离屏幕只有半米时，传来一阵轻柔娇媚的声音：“安特宁花园，坐落于伊奥斯近郊，根据古代旅游指南与照片复制。请注意……”
铎丝开始悄声说话，谢顿无法再听清楚电视机传出的声音。她说：“有人走近时它就开启，我们走开后会自动关闭。如果我们靠得够近，便能在它的掩护之下交谈，但不要望着我，万一有人接近立刻闭嘴。”
谢顿低着头，双手交握摆在胸前（他早已注意到，这是最常被采用的姿势），说道：“我预料随时有人会放声哭泣。”
“也许有人会这么做，他们正在哀悼他们的失落世界。”铎丝说。
“我希望他们每隔一阵子更换一次影片，总是看同样的内容可真要命。”
“它们全都不一样，”铎丝的眼睛来回扫瞄了一下，“或许会定期更换内容，我也不知道。”
“等一等！”谢顿的音量稍稍提高，接着又赶紧压低，“到这里来。”
铎丝皱起眉头，她没听清楚那几个字，不过谢顿又轻轻摆头示意。他们再度蹑手蹑脚地移动，但谢顿的脚步越迈越大，因为他感到必须加快步伐。铎丝追上来，突然拉住他的裰服——只是一瞬间的动作，他便放慢了脚步。
“这里有机器人。”在电视机的声音的掩护之下他说道。
画面是一栋住宅的一角，前景是一片起伏的草坪与一列树篱，此外还有三个只能形容为机器人的东西。它们显然都是金属制品，外形有几分接近人类。
录音的旁白说：“这是新近制作的画面，是著名的三世纪温都姆属地的建筑。您见到的接近正中的那个机仆，根据民间传说名叫本达；根据古代的记录，它在被替换前服务了二十二年。”
铎丝说：“‘新近制作的’，所以他们一定经常更换画面。”
“除非他们这句‘新近制作的’说了有一千年。”
此时，另一个麦曲生人走进这个声域。他压低声音，不过没有谢顿与铎丝的耳语那么低，说道：“你们好，兄弟们。”
当他说话的时候，并未望着谢顿与铎丝：谢顿在惊吓之余，曾对他投以不自觉的一瞥，便赶紧将头转开；铎丝则完全没理会这个人。
谢顿感到犹豫不决。菌丝七二曾说圣堂内禁止交谈，也许他言过其实．话说回来，他在童年后再也未曾进入圣堂。
在走投无路之下，谢顿认定自己必须开口。他悄声说道：“你好，兄弟。”
他根本不晓得是否有什么正确的答复用语，或者这种用语是否存在。不过，那位麦曲生人好像不觉得有什么不对劲。
“愿你重归奥罗拉怀抱。”他说。
“也愿你重归，”谢顿说完之后，由于感到对方似乎期待他再说下去，于是补充道：“奥罗拉怀抱。”直到此时，紧张状态才往无形中松弛少许，谢顿察觉他的额头正在冒汗。
那位麦曲生人说：“真漂亮！我以前从没看过这个画面。”
“做得十分精巧。”接着，谢顿壮着胆子加了一句，“这是永远无法忘怀的失落。”
对方似乎吓了一跳。然后说：“的确，的确。”说完径自离去。
铎丝斥责道：“不要冒险，别说没有必要的话。”
“这似乎很自然。无论如何，这的确是新近制作的。不过那些机仆真令人失望，他们的模样是我想象中的普通机器人。我想看的是有机体的机仆，具有人形的那种。”
“假如它们的确存在，”铎丝的几气有些迟疑，“在我的感觉中，它们不会用来从事园艺工作。”
“正是如此，”谢顿说，“我们必须找到长老阁。”
“那得真有长老阁才行。在我的感觉中，这个空洞的洞穴除了空洞之外根本一无所有。”
“我们找找看。”
他们沿着墙壁向前走，经过一个又一个屏幕，试着在每个屏幕前停留长短不等的时间。最后，铎丝突然紧紧抓住谢顿的双臂，原来在某两个屏幕之间，有些线条隐约形成一个矩形轮廓。
“一道门。”铎丝说完，又有所保留地补充道：“你认为是吗？”
谢顿暗中四下张望一番。为了维持哀伤的气氛，每个人的脸不是盯着电视显像器，就是以悲伤的心情低头专心面对地板。对他们两人而言，这是最方便不过的机会。
谢顿说：“你想它要怎么打开？”
“开启触片？”
“我看不出来。”
“只是未标出而已，不过那里有点变色，你看到没有？经过多少手掌？被按了多少次？”
“我来试试。你帮我把风，如果行人向这边望，就赶紧踢我一下。”
他稍微屏住气息，碰了一下那个变色的部位．可是没有任何反应。接着他将手掌完全按上去，并且用力一压。
嵌在墙上的门静静开启，没有吱吱作响，也没有摩擦声。谢顿尽快钻进去，铎丝紧跟在他后面。两人进来之后，那道门又重新关上。
“现在的问题是，”铎丝说，“有没有人看到我们？”
谢顿说：“长老们一定经常由这道门出入。”
“没错，可是会有人把我们当长老吗？”
谢倾等了一下，然后说：“如果我们被看到，如果有人认为出了问题，那么我们进来不到十五秒钟，这道门就会再被人撞开。”
“有这个可能，”铎丝淡淡地说，“也可能在门的这一侧，根本没什么值得看、值得偷的东西，所以没有人在意我们是否闯入。”
“这点待会儿就能见分晓。”谢顿喃喃自语道。
他们进来的这个房间稍嫌狭窄，而且有几分昏暗，不过他们再走进一点之后，室内的光线便明亮起来。
房间里有些宽大而舒适的椅子、几张小桌、数个坐卧两用的沙发、一台又深又高的冰箱，此外还有一些碗柜。
“如果这就是长老阁，”谢顿说，“长老们似乎让自己过得很舒服，虽然圣堂本身简朴肃穆。”
“这是意料中的事，”铎丝说，“统治阶级力行禁欲生活的少之又少，只有在公开场合例外。把这点记在你的笔记簿上，作为心理史学的金科玉律之一。”她四下望了望，“这里也没有机器人。”
谢顿说：“阁代表高处，别忘记了。这个屋顶并不高，上面一定还有许多楼层，那一定就是通道。”他指着铺有高级地毯的楼梯。
然而，他并未朝它走去，却迟疑地四下打量。
铎丝猜到他在找什么。“别再想升降机了，麦曲生有一种崇拜原始主义的风尚，这点你该还记得吧？不会有升降机的，非但如此，就算我们踏上楼梯底端，我也相当确定，它绝不会开始向上移动。我们必须爬上去，也许有好几层呢。”
“爬上去？”
“它一定通往长老阁，这是理所当然的事——如果它真通到某处。你究竟是要还是不要去长老阁看一看？”
于是他们一起走向楼梯间，开始向上爬。
随着楼层的增加，光线的强度稳定地、显著地递减。等到他们爬了三层之后，谢顿深深吸一口气，悄声说道：“我自认身体状况相当好，但我痛恨这种运动。”
“你不习惯这种消耗体力的特殊方式。”她点也没有筋疲力尽的感觉。
楼梯在第三层的尽头结束，他们面前又出现了另一道门。
“如果锁住了呢？”谢顿这句话不大像是对铎丝说的，倒更像自言自语：“我们要试着将它撞开吗？”
但是铎丝却说：“既然下面的门没锁，它又何必上锁呢？假使这就是长老阁，我猜想应该有个禁忌，禁止长老之外的任何人进入，而禁忌要比任何类型的锁更为牢靠。”
“只对那些接受禁忌的人有效。”谢顿虽然这么说，却未向那道门走去。
“既然你踌躇不前，现在还有时间向后转。”铎丝说，“事实上，我是想劝你回头。”
“我之所以踌躇不前，是因为不知道会在里面发现什么。如果它是空的……”
然后，他以提高几分的音量补充道：“那么它就是空的。”说完他便大步向前，按了一下开扁触板。
那道门迅疾无声地缩人墙内，里向立刻涌出一股强光．谢帧惊愕之余连忙后退一步。
而对着他的是个人彤，它的双眼炯炯有神，双臂举在半空之中，一只脚稍微向前踏出，全身闪耀着微弱的黄色金属的光芒。乍一看，它似乎穿着一件紧身短袖上衣，但再仔细审视，那件上衣显然是整体的一部分。
“它是个机器人，”谢顿以敬畏的口吻说，“但它是金属制品。”
铎丝说：“还有更糟的，”刚才她曾迅速左右挪移，“它的眼睛并没跟着我移动，它的手臂连些微颤抖的动作都没有。它不是活的——如果我们说机器人有死有活的话。”
这时，一个人——百分之百是个真人——从机器人身后走出来，说道：“它也许不是，但我可是活生生的。”
铎丝几乎立刻反射般地踏出一步，挡在谢顿与那个突然冒出的人之间。
Chapter 58

Seldon pushed Dors to one side, perhaps a shade more roughly than he intended.
"I dont need protection. This is our old friend Sunmaster Fourteen." The man who faced them, wearing a double sash that was perhaps his right as High Elder, said, "And you are Tribesman Seldon."
"Of course," said Seldon.
"And this, despite her masculine dress, is Tribeswoman Venabili."
Dors said nothing.
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "You are right, of course, tribesman. You are in no danger of physical harm from me. Please sit down. Both of you. Since you are not a Sister, tribeswoman, you need not retire. There is a seat for you which, if you value such a distinction, you will be the first woman ever to have used."
"I do not value such a distinction," said Dors, spacing her words for emphasis. Sunmaster Fourteen nodded.
"That is as you wish. I too will sit down, for I must ask you questions and I do not care to do it standing." They were sitting now in a corner of the room. Seldons eyes wandered to the metal robot.
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "It is a robot."
"I know," said Seldon briefly.
"I know you do," said Sunmaster Fourteen with similar curtness. "But now that we have settled that matter, why are you here?"
Seldon gazed steadily at Sunmaster Fourteen and said, "To see the robot."
"Do you know that no one but an Elder is allowed in the aerie?"
"I did not know that, but I suspected it."
"Do you know that no tribesperson is allowed in the Sacratorium?"
"I was told that."
"And you ignored the fact, is that it?"
"As I said, we wanted to see the robot."
"Do you know that no woman, even a Sister, is allowed in the Sacratorium except at certain stated--and rare--occasions?"
"I was told that."
"And do you know that no woman is at any time--or for any reason--allowed to dress in masculine garb? That holds, within the borders of Mycogen, for tribeswomen as well as for Sisters."
"I was not told that, but I am not surprised."
"Good. I want you to understand all this. Now, why did you want to see the robot?"
Seldon said with a shrug, "Curiosity. I had never seen a robot or even known that such a thing existed."
"And how did you come to know that it did exist and, specifically, that it existed here?"
Seldon was silent, then said, "I do not wish to answer that question."
"Is that why you were brought to Mycogen by Tribesman Hummin? To investigate robots?"
"No. Tribesman Hummin brought us here that we might be secure. However, we are scholars, Dr. Venabili and I. Knowledge is our province and to gain knowledge is our purpose. Mycogen is little understood outside its borders and we wish to know more about your ways and your methods of thought. It is a natural desire and, it seems to us, a harmless--even praiseworthy--one."
"Ah, but we do not wish the outer tribes and worlds to know about us. That is our natural desire and we are the judge of what is harmless to us and what harmful. So I ask you again, tribesman: How did you know that a robot existed in Mycogen and that it existed in this room?"
"General rumor," said Seldon at length.
"Do you insist on that?"
"General rumor. I insist on it."
Sunmaster Fourteens keen blue eyes seemed to sharpen and he said without raising his voice, "Tribesman Seldon, we have long cooperated with Tribesman Hummin. For a tribesman, he has seemed a decent and trustworthy individual. For a tribesman! When he brought you two to us and commended you to our protection, we granted it. But Tribesman Hummin, whatever his virtues, is still a tribesman and we had misgivings. We were not at all sure what your--or his--real purpose might be."
"Our purpose was knowledge," said Seldon. "Academic knowledge. Tribeswoman Venabili is a historian and I too have an interest in history. Why should we not be interested in Mycogenian history?"
"For one thing, because we do not wish you to be.--In any case, two of our trusted Sisters were sent to you. They were to cooperate with you, try to find out what it was you wanted, and--what is the expression you tribesmen use?--play along with you. Yet not in such a way that you would be too aware as to what was happening."
Sunmaster Fourteen smiled, but it was a grim smile. "Raindrop Forty-Five," Sunmaster Fourteen went on, "went shopping with Tribeswoman Venabili, but there seemed nothing out of the way in what happened on those trips. Naturally, we had a full report. Raindrop Forty-Three showed you, Tribesman Seldon, our microfarms. You might have been suspicious of her willingness to accompany you alone, something that is utterly out of the question for us, but you reasoned that what applied to Brothers did not apply to tribesmen and you flattered yourself that that flimsy bit of reasoning won her over. She complied with your desire, though at considerable cost to her peace of mind. And, eventually, you asked for the Book. To have handed it over too easily might have roused your suspicion, so she pretended to a perverse desire only you could satisfy. Her self-sacrifice will not be forgotten.--I take it, tribesman, you still have the Book and I suspect you have it with you now. May I have it?"
Seldon sat in bitter silence.
Sunmaster Fourteens wrinkled hand remained obtrusively outstretched and he said, "How much better it would be than to wrest it from you by force."
And Seldon handed it over.
Sunmaster Fourteen leafed through its pages briefly, as though to reassure himself it was unharmed. He said with a small sigh, "It will have to be carefully destroyed in the approved manner. Sad.--But once you had this Book, we were, of course, not surprised when you made your way out to the Sacratorium. You were watched at all times, for you cannot think that any Brother or Sister, not totally absorbed, would not recognize you for tribespeople at a glance. We know a skincap when we see one and there are less than seventy of them in Mycogen ... almost all belonging to tribesmen on official business who remain entirely in secular governmental buildings during the time they are here. So you were not only seen but unmistakably identified, over and over.
"The elderly Brother who met you was careful to tell you about the library as well as about the Sacratorium, but he was also careful to tell you what you were forbidden to do, for we did not wish to entrap you. Skystrip Two also warned you ... and quite forcibly. Nevertheless, you did not turn away.
"The shop at which you bought the white kirtle and the two sashes informed us at once and from that we knew well what you intended. The library was kept empty, the librarian was warned to keep his eyes to himself, the Sacratorium was kept under-utilized. The one Brother who inadvertently spoke to you almost gave it away, but hastened off when he realized with whom he was dealing. And then you came up here.
"You see, then, that it was your intention to come up here and that we in no way lured you here. You came as a result of your own action, your own desire, and what I want to ask you--yet once again--is: Why?"
It was Dors who answered this time, her voice firm, her eyes hard. "We will tell you yet once again, Mycogenian. We are scholars, who consider knowledge sacred and it is only knowledge that we seek. You did not lure us here, but you did not stop us either, as you might have done before ever we approached this building. You smoothed our way and made it easy for us and even that might be considered a lure. And what harm have we done? We have in no way disturbed the building, or this room, or you, or that."
She pointed to the robot. "It is a dead lump of metal that you hide here and we now know that it is dead and that is all the knowledge we sought. We thought it would be more significant and we are disappointed, but now that we know it is merely what it is, we will leave--and, if you wish, we will leave Mycogen as well."
Sunmaster Fourteen listened with no trace of expression on his face, but when she was done, he addressed Seldon, saying, "This robot, as you see it, is a symbol, a symbol of all we have lost and of all we no longer have, of all that, through thousands of years, we have not forgotten and what we intend someday to return to. Because it is all that remains to us that is both material and authentic, it is dear to us--yet to your woman it is only a dead lump of metal. Do you associate yourself with that judgment, Tribesman Seldon?"
Seldon said, "We are members of societies that do not tie ourselves to a past that is thousands of years old, making no contact at all with what has existed between that past and ourselves. We live in the present, which we recognize as the product of all the past and not of one long-gone moment of time that we hug to our chests. We realize, intellectually, what the robot may mean to you and we are willing to let it continue to mean that to you. But we can only see it with our own eyes, as you can only see it with yours. To us, it is a dead lump of metal."
"And now," said Dors, "we will leave."
"You will not," said Sunmaster Fourteen. "By coming here, you have committed a crime. It is a crime only in our eyes, as you will hasten to point out"--his lips curved in a wintry smile--"but this is our territory and, within it, we make the definitions. And this crime, as we define it, is punishable by death."
"And you are going to shoot us down?" said Dors haughtily.
Sunmaster Fourteens expression was one of contempt and he continued to speak only to Seldon. "What do you think we are, Tribesman Seldon? Our culture is as old as yours, as complex, as civilized, as humane. I am not armed. You will be tried and, since you are manifestly guilty, executed according to law, quickly and painlessly.
"If you were to try to leave now, I would not stop you, but there are many Brothers below, many more than there appeared to be when you entered the Sacratorium and, in their rage at your action, they may lay rough and forceful hands on you. It has happened in our history that tribespeople have even died so and it is not a pleasant death--certainly not a painless one."
"We were warned of this," said Dors, "by Skystrip Two. So much for your complex, civilized, and humane culture."
"People can be moved to violence at moments of emotion, Tribesman Seldon," said Sunmaster Fourteen calmly, "whatever their humanity in moments of calm. This is true in every culture, as your woman, who is said to be a historian, must surely know."
Seldon said, "Let us remain reasonable, Sunmaster Fourteen. You may be the law in Mycogen over local affairs, but you are not the law over us and you know it. We are both non-Mycogenian citizens of the Empire and it is the Emperor and his designated legal officers who must remain in charge of any capital offense."
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "That may be so in statutes and on papers and on holovision screens, but we are not talking theory now. The High Elder has long had the power to punish crimes of sacrilege without interference from the Imperial throne."
"If the criminals are your own people," said Seldon. "It would be quite different if they were outsiders."
"I doubt it in this case. Tribesman Hummin brought you here as fugitives and we are not so yeast-headed in Mycogen that we dont strongly suspect that you are fugitives from the Emperors laws. Why should he object if we do his work for him?"
"Because," said Seldon, "he would. Even if we were fugitives from the Imperial authorities and even if he wanted us only to punish us, he would still want us. To allow you to kill, by whatever means and for whatever reason, non-Mycogenians without due Imperial process would be to defy his authority and no Emperor could allow such a precedent. No matter how eager he might be to see that the microfood trade not be interrupted, he would still feel it necessary to re-establish the Imperial prerogative. Do you wish, in your eagerness to kill us, to have a division of Imperial soldiery loot your farms and your dwellings, desecrate your Sacratorium, and take liberties with the Sisters: Consider."
Sunmaster Fourteen smiled once again, but displayed no softness. "Actually, I have considered and there is an alternative. After we condemn you, we could delay your execution to allow you to appeal to the Emperor for a review of your case. The Emperor might be grateful at this evidence of our ready submission to his authority and grateful too to lay his hands on you two--for some reason of his own--and Mycogen might profit. Is that what you want, then? To appeal to the Emperor in due course and to be delivered to him?"
Seldon and Dors looked at each other briefly and were silent.
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "I feel you would rather be delivered to the Emperor than die, but why do I get the impression that the preference is only by a slight margin?"
"Actually," said a new voice, "I think neither alternative is acceptable and that we must search for a third."
第五十八章
　　谢顿将铎丝推到一旁，他的动作或许比本意粗鲁了些。“我不需要保护，这是我们的老朋友日主十四。”
面对他们的人披挂着一双肩带，那也许是他身为元老的一种权利。他说：“而你是外族男子谢顿。”
“当然。”谢顿说。
“而这位，尽管她穿着男性服装，是外族女子凡纳比里。”
铎丝什么也没说。
日主十四说：“你当然说得对，外族男子。你们没有危险，我不会伤害你们。请坐，你们两位。既然你不是一位姐妹，外族女子，你就没有必要退下。你可以坐在这里，如果你珍视这样的殊荣，你将是第一个坐上这个座位的女人。”
“我不珍视这样的殊荣。”铎丝一字一顿地强调。
日主十四点了点头：“随你的便。我也要坐下来，因为我必须问你们一些问题，我不喜欢站着做这件事。”
他们坐在这个房间的一个角落，谢顿的眼睛游移到那个金属机器人身上。
日主十四说：“那是个机仆。”
“我知道。”谢顿简短地答道。
“我知道这点。”日主十四的话也同样简略，“不过既然我们已经达成这个共识，现在我要问，你们来这里做什么？”
谢顿目不转睛地凝视着日主十四：“来看这个机仆。”
“你可知道除了长老，任何人都不准进入长老阁？”
“我不知道这件事，但我料想到了。”
“你可知道外族人一律不准进入圣堂？”
“我听说了。”
“而你却漠视这些，是吗？”
“正如我所说，我们想要看那个机仆。”
“你可知道除了在某些特定的，而且罕有的节日之外，任何一个女人，甚至包括姐妹在内，都不可以进入圣堂？”
“我听说了。”
“你可知道不论任何时候，女人都不准以任何理由穿着男性服装？在麦曲生边界之内，它非但适用于姐妹，也同样适用于外族女子。”
“这点我没听说过，但我并不惊讶。”
“很好，我要你了解这一切前提。现在告诉我，你为何想要看这个机仆？”
谢顿耸了耸肩，说道：“出于好奇。我从没见过机仆，甚至不知道有这种东西存在。”
“那你怎么会知道它的确存在，非但如此，还知道它在这里？”
谢顿沉默了一会儿，然后说：“我不愿意回答这个问题。”
“这就是外族男子夫铭把你们带到麦曲生的原因？前来调查机仆？”
“不，外族男子夫铭带我们到这里来，只是希望确保我们的安全。然而，我们是学者，凡纳比里博士和我都是。知识是我们的疆场，求取知识是我们的目标。麦曲生的一切鲜为外界了解，我们希望多知道些你们的风土民情和思考方式。这是一个自然的渴望，而且在我们看来，它不仅无害，还值得赞赏。”
“哼，我们却不希望外旅和其他世界了解我们，那是我们自然的渴望。至于什么对我们无害，什么对我们有害，要由我们自己判断。所以我再问你一遍，外族男子，你怎么知道麦曲生境内有个机仆，而且藏在这个房间里？”
“道听途说。”谢顿终于回答。
“你坚持这个答案吗？”
“道听途说，我坚持这个答案。”
日主十四锐利的蓝眼睛似乎变得更为尖锐，但他并未提高音量。“外族男子谢顿，我们和外族男子夫铭有长久的合作关系。就外族人而言，他似乎是高尚而值得信赖的一位——仅就一个外族人而言！当他带你们两位前来，嘱托我们保护你们的时候，我们答应了这件事。但不论外族男子夫铭有多少美德，他仍旧是个外族人，我们还是放心不下。当初，我们完全无法确定你们的——或是他的——真正目的是什么。”
“我们的目的是知识，”谢顿说，“学术性的知识。外族女子凡纳比里是历史学家，我自己也喜欢历史。我们为何不该对麦曲生的历史有兴趣？”
“原因之一，是因为我们不希望你们如此。总之，我们派了两个信得过的姐妹到你们身边。她们奉命跟你们合作，试图查出你们究竟想要什么，还有——你们外族人是怎么说的？跟你们假戏真做。然而，却不让你们察觉她们真正的意图。”日主十四露出微笑，但那是一个狞笑。
“雨点四五，”日主十四继续说，“陪同外族女子凡纳比里逛街购物。但在几次行程中，似乎都没有什么不寻常的事发生——当然，我们接获了完整的报告。雨点四三则带领你，外族男子谢顿，去参观我们的微生农场。本来，你可能怀疑她为何愿意单独陪你前往，这对我们而言是绝不可能的事。但你却自作聪明地推论，认为适用于兄弟的规矩并不适用于外族男子；你自以为是地相信，这么薄弱的理由就能解除她的心理防线。她顺应了你的心愿，虽然这对她内心的宁静造成莫大伤害。最后，你开口要那本典籍。如果过于轻易交给你，有可能引起你的疑心，所以她假装有一种违常的欲望，只有你才能满足。我们绝不会忘记她的自我牺牲。我认为，外族男子，你仍拥有那本典籍，而且我猜你正带在身上。我能要回来吗？”
谢顿痛苦、沉默地呆坐着。
日主十四布满皱纹的手坚定地伸出来。他说：“这比从你手中强行夺走好多了吧？”
于是谢顿将书递给他。日主十四随便翻了翻，仿佛要确定它并未受损。
他轻轻叹了一声．又说：“必须以认可的方式将它谨慎地销毁，可悲啊！不过，既然让你拿到这本典籍，你们会启程前往圣堂，我们一点也不惊讶。你们随时随地都受到监视。你不会认为有任何兄弟或姐妹，只要不是心无旁骜，会无法一眼就认出你们是外族人吧。我们看到人皮帽时，立刻就能分辨出来，而在整个麦曲生，发出去的人皮帽还不到七十顶——几乎全部属于前来谈公事的外族男子，他们在此地停留期间，自始至终都留在世俗的政府建筑内。所以你们不只被人看见，而且总是被正确无误地指认，一次又一次。
“那位和你们不期而遇的年长弟兄，没有忘记告诉你们有关图书馆和圣堂的一切，但他也不忘告诉你们什么事是不能做的，因为我们不希望诱你们落入陷阱。天纹二也警告过你们——以强而有力的方式。然而，你们并未因此打消念头。
“你们购买白色裰服和两条肩带的那家商店，在第一时间就向我们通报，而根据这个情报，我们对你们的企图了如指掌。图书馆故意被撤空，馆员事先接到警告，要他对你们不闻不问，圣堂则保持低度使用的状态。那位一时不察而和你攀谈的兄弟，险些让我们的计谋曝光，但在了解到面对的是什么人之后，他便立刻匆匆离去。然后，你们就来到这里。
“所以你看，来到这里是你们的本意，我们根本没有引诱你们。是你们自己的行动、自己的渴望把你们带来的。而我要再问你们一遍的是：为什么？”
这回轮到铎丝回答，她的语气坚定、目光严厉。“那我们就再一次告诉你，麦曲生人。我们是学者，我们认为知识是神圣的，而我们寻找的也只是知识。你未曾引诱我们来到此地，可是你也没有阻止我们——早在我们接近这座建筑之前，你就能这么做了。反之，你替我们开路，让我们通行无阻，即使这样也可视为一种引诱。而我们造成了什么损害吗？我们完全没有侵扰这座建筑物，或足这间房间，或是你这个人，或是那玩意。”
她指着那个机器人：“你藏在这里的是一堆破铜烂铁，现在我们知道它是死的，我们寻求的知识也仅止于此。我们本来以为它十分重要，但我们失望了。现在我们知道它不过如此，我们马上就走。你若希望的话，我们还会码上离开麦曲生。”
日主十四聆听这番话的时候，脸上没有丝毫表情，但是当她说完后，他却对谢顿说：“你所见到的这个机仆是个象征，象征着我们失落的一切、我们不再拥有的一切，也象征着数千年来我们未曾遗忘、总有一天将要收复的一切。如今我们身边只有它是一件既具体又可信的遗物，因此在我们眼中珍贵异常。可是对你的女人而言，它却只是‘一堆破铜烂铁’。你认同这个评价吗，外族男子谢顿？”
谢顿说：“我们两人所属的社会，并未将自己和数千年前的过去捆在一起，也不会去理会存在过去和我们之间的一切。我们生活在现在，我们将它视为所有过去的总和，而并非仅源自我们所拥有的某个年代久远的时刻。我们了解——理智上了解——这个机仆对你们可能具有的意义，我们愿意让它继续对你们有这样的意义。但我们只能用自己的眼光看它，正如你只能用你的眼光看它一样。对我们而言，它就是一堆破铜烂铁。”
“现在，”铎丝说，“我们要走了。”
“你们不能走。”日主十四说，“你们来到这里，就已经犯了罪。它是只存在于我们眼中的罪行——我知道你会赶紧指出这一点。”他的嘴角弯出一个冷冰冰的笑容．“然而这里是我们的领土，在这个范围内，一切由我们下定义。而在我们的定义中，这是一项应当处死的重罪。”
“你准备将我们射杀吗？”铎丝以倨傲的口气说。
日主十四露出轻蔑的表情，继续只对谢顿一个人说话：“你以为我们是什么人，外旅男子谢顿？我们的文化和你们的同样古老，也同样繁复、同样文明、同样人道。我没有携带武器。你们将接受审判，由于你们罪证确凿，注定将被依法处决，既利落又没痛苦。假如现在你们试图离开这里，我不会阻止你们，但是下面等着很多兄弟，比你们进平堂时见到的多得多。你们的行为令他们咬牙切齿，他们也许会对你们动粗，下手绝不留情。在我们的历史上，甚至有外族人死在这种情况之下。那并非一种愉快的死法，而且绝不是毫无痛苦。”
“我们听过这种警告，”铎丝说，“天纹二说的。好一个繁复、文明又人道的文化！”
“不论民众在冷静的时候具有何种人道情怀，外族男子谢顿，”日主十四冷静地说，“在情绪激动的时候，他们全能被煽动成暴力分子。这在各个文化中都一样，你的女人据说是个历史学家，她一定知道这点。”
谢顿说：“让我们保持理智，日主十四。在地方性事务上，你也许可以代表麦曲生的法律，但你并非我们的法律，这点你也知道。我们两人都不是麦曲生人，而是银河帝国的公民，任何应判死刑的重罪，都该交由皇上或是他任命的司法官员处理。”
日主十四说：“在法令上、文件上，或全息电视屏幕上或许如此，但我们现在不是在谈理论。长久以来，元老一向都有惩处亵渎罪的权力，从未受到来自皇权的干涉。”
“罪犯若是你们自己的同胞，自然如此。”谢顿说，“但如果是外人，情况就相当不同。”
“就本案而言，我对这点深表怀疑。外旅男子夫铭把你们当逃犯一样带到这里，麦曲生人脑袋里装的可不是发粉，我们怀疑你们是在逃避皇上的法律。如果我们帮他代劳，他为什么要反对呢？”
“因为——”谢顿说，“他一定会。即使我们是帝国当局通缉的逃犯；即使他要抓我们回去，只是为了惩罚我们，他仍会想要将我们生擒。无论用什么方式，为了什么理由，如果未经适当的帝国法律程序，就让你杀掉一个非麦曲生人，那等于向他的权威挑战，没有任何皇帝能开这种先例。不论他多么希望微生食品的贸易不受干扰，他仍会感到有必要重建皇帝的权威。难道你希望，由于你逞一时之快将我们杀掉，而招来一师帝国军队掠夺你们的农场和住所，亵渎你们的圣堂，并且非礼你们的姐妹？请你三思。”
日主十四再度露出笑容，可是显得并未软化：“事实上，我已三思过了，的确另有一个选择。在我们将你们两人定罪后，我们可以延缓死刑的执行，允许你们向皇上提出上诉，要求重审你们的案子。如此证明我们臣服于他的权威之下，还把你们交到他的手中，皇上也许因此圣心大悦，而麦曲生便可能受惠。所以说，这就是你想要的吗？找机会向皇上提出上诉，然后被解送到他那里去？”
谢顿与铎丝很快互望了一眼，两人都没吭声。
“你们似乎宁愿被解送给皇上，也不愿死在这里。”日主十四说，“可是为什么我有一种感觉，你们觉得这两种选择都没什么差别？”
“其实，”一个新的声音说，“我认为这两种选择都无法令人接受，我们必须找出第三条路。”
Chapter 59

It was Dors who identified the newcomer first, perhaps because it was she who expected him.
"Hummin," she said, "thank goodness you found us. I got in touch with you the moment I realized I was not going to deflect Hari from"--she held up her hands in a wide gesture "this."
Hummins smile was a small one that did not alter the natural gravity of his face. There was a subtle weariness about him.
"My dear," he said, "I was engaged in other things. I cannot always pull away at a moments notice. And when I got here, I had, like you two, to supply myself with a kirtle and sash, to say nothing of a skincap, and make my way out here. Had I been here earlier, I might have stopped this, but I believe Im not too late."
Sunmaster Fourteen had recovered from what had seemed to be a painful shock. He said in a voice that lacked its customary severe depth, "How did you get in here, Tribesman Hummin?"
"It was not easy, High Elder, but as Tribeswoman Venabili likes to say, I am a very persuasive person. Some of the citizens here remember who I was and what I have done for Mycogen in the past, that I am even an honorary Brother. Have you forgotten, Sunmaster Fourteen?"
The Elder replied, "I have not forgotten, but even the most favorable memory can not survive certain actions. A tribesman here and a tribeswoman. There is no greater crime. All you have done is not great enough to balance that. My people are not unmindful. We will make it up to you some other way. But these two must die or be handed over to the Emperor."
"I am also here," said Hummin calmly. "Is that not a crime as well?"
"For you," said Sunmaster Fourteen, "for you personally, as a kind of honorary Brother, I can ... overlook it ... once. Not these two."
"Because you expect a reward from the Emperor? Some favor? Some concession? Have you already been in touch with him or with his Chief of Staff, Eto Demerzel, more likely?"
"That is not a subject for discussion."
"Which is itself an admission. Come on, I dont ask what the Emperor promised, but it cannot be much. He does not have much to give in these degenerate days. Let me make you an offer. Have these two told you they are scholars?"
"They have."
"And they are. They are not lying. The tribeswoman is a historian and the tribesman is a mathematician. The two together are trying to combine their talents to make a mathematics of history and they call the combined subject psychohistory. "
Sunmaster Fourteen said, "I know nothing about this psychohistory, nor do I care to know. Neither it nor any other facet of your tribal learning interests me."
"Nevertheless," said Hummin, "I suggest that you listen to me."
It took Hummin some fifteen minutes, speaking concisely, to describe the possibility of organizing the natural laws of society (something he always mentioned with audible quotation marks in the tone of his voice) in such a way as to make it possible to anticipate the future with a substantial degree of probability.
And when he was done, Sunmaster Fourteen, who had listened expressionlessly, said, "A highly unlikely piece of speculation, I should say."
Seldon, with a rueful expression, seemed about to speak, undoubtedly to agree, but Hummins hand, resting lightly on the others knee, tightened unmistakably.
Hummin said, "Possibly, High Elder, but the Emperor doesnt think so. And by the Emperor, who is himself an amiable enough personage, I really mean Demerzel, concerning whose ambitions you need no instruction. They would like very much to have these two scholars, which is why Ive brought them here for safekeeping. I had little expectation that you would do Demerzels work for him by delivering the scholars to him."
"They have committed a crime that--"
"Yes, we know, High Elder, but it is only a crime because you choose to call it so. No real harm has been done."
"It has been done to our belief, to our deepest felt--"
"But imagine what harm will be done if psychohistory falls into the hands of Demerzel. Yes, I grant that nothing may come of it, but suppose for a moment that something does and that the Imperial government has the use of it--can foretell what is to come--can take measures with that foreknowledge which no one else would have--can take measures, in fact, designed to bring about an alternate future more to the Imperial liking."
"Well?"
"Is there any doubt, High Elder, that the alternate future more to the Imperial liking would be one of tightened centralization? For centuries now, as you very well know, the Empire has been undergoing a steady decentralization. Many worlds now acknowledge only lip service to the Emperor and virtually rule themselves. Even here on Trantor, there is decentralization. Mycogen, as only one example, is free of Imperial interference for the most part. You rule its High Elder and there is no Imperial officer at your side overseeing your actions and decisions. How long do you think that will last with men like Demerzel adjusting the future to their liking?"
"Still the flimsiest of speculation," said Sunmaster Fourteen, "but a disturbing one, I admit."
"On the other hand, if these scholars can complete their task, an unlikely if, you might say, but an if--then they are sure to remember that you spared them when you might have chosen not to. And it would then be conceivable that they would learn to arrange a future, for instance, that would allow Mycogen to be given a world of its own, a world that could be terraformed into a close replica of the Lost World. And even if these two forget your kindness, I will be here to remind them."
"Well--" said Sunmaster Fourteen.
"Come on," said Hummin, "it is not hard to decide what must be going through your mind. Of all tribespeople, you must trust Demerzel the least. And though the chance of psychohistory might be small (if I was not being honest with you, I would not admit that) it is not zero; and if it will bring about a restoration of the Lost World, what can you want more than that? What would you not risk for even a tiny chance of that? Come now--I promise you and my promises are not lightly given. Release these two and choose a tiny chance of your hearts desire over no chance at all."
There was silence and then Sunmaster Fourteen sighed. "I dont know how it is, Tribesman Hummin, but on every occasion that we meet, you persuade me into something I do not really want to do."
"Have I ever misled you, High Elder?"
"You have never offered me so small a chance?"
"And so high a possible reward. The one balances the other."
And Sunmaster Fourteen nodded his head. "You are right. Take these two and take them out of Mycogen and never let me see them again unless there comes a time when--But surely it will not be in my lifetime."
"Perhaps not, High Elder. But your people have been waiting patiently for nearly twenty thousand years. Would you then object to waiting another--perhaps--two hundred?"
"I would not willingly wait one moment, but my people will wait as long as they must."
And standing up, he said, "I will clear the path. Take them and go."
第五十九章
　　铎丝第一个认出来者的身份——或许因为她一直在期盼他的出现。
“夫铭，”她说，“谢天谢地，你总算找到我们了。我跟你联络的时候，正了解到我无法让哈里避免这——”她举起双手，夸张地向左右一摊：“——一切。”
夫铭露出浅浅的微笑，但这无法改变他天生的严肃神情。此外，他似乎带着一股不甚明显的倦意。
“亲爱的，”他说，“我在忙别的事，我无法总是随传随到。当我来到此地之后，我得像你们两人一样，先穿戴上裰服和肩带，人皮帽就更不用说了，然后还要赶来这里。要是我来早一些，也许能阻止这一切，但我相信我来得不算迟。”
日主十四似乎陷入一阵痛苦的惊愕中，好一会儿才回过神来，他用不再那么严肃深沉的语调说：“你是怎么进来这里的，外族男子夫铭？”
“这可不容易，元老，但正如外族女子凡纳比里喜欢说的，我是个非常具有说服力的人。这里某些居民还记得我是谁、我在过去为麦曲生做过什么，此外——我还是一名荣誉兄弟，你忘记了吗，日主十四？”
元老答道：“我没忘记，但即使是最美好的记忆，也经不起某些行动的冲击。一个外族男子竟然来到这里，还带了一个外族女子，没有比这更严重的罪行了，你为我们做的一切也不够抵消。我的人民不是忘恩负义之辈，我们会用别的方式补偿你。可是这两人必须受死，或是将他们解送给皇上。”
“我也来了。”夫铭以平静的口吻说，“这不也是一项罪行吗？”
“对你而言，”日主十四说，“对你个人而言，你是荣誉兄弟，我可以……宽容……一次，但这两个不行。”
“因为你期望皇上的奖赏？某种好处？某种让步？你已经和他接触了吗？或者更有可能的是，和他的行政首长伊图•丹莫茨尔联络上了？”
“这不是我们应该讨论的题目。”
“你这句话就等于是默认了。好啦，我不问皇上答应给你什么好处，但它绝不可能太多，在这个衰微的岁月里，他没有太多能给你的。让我向你提个条件，这两位有没有告诉你他们是学者？”
“说过。”
“的确如此，他们不是在说谎。这位外族女子是历史学家，这位外族男子是数学家。他们试图联合两人的才智，创造一个处理历史的数学，他们将这个合作题目称为‘心理史学’。”
日主十四说：“我对这个心理史学一无所知，也不想知道。不论是它或你们外族人的其他任何学问，我都一概没有兴趣。”
“纵使如此，”夫铭说，“我还是建议你听我说一说。”
夫铭大约花了十五分钟的时间，以精简的语言描述心理史学的可能性——将社会的自然定律组织起来（每当提到那些定律时，他总会改变语调，让人一听就知道有引号存在），并在大量借助几率之下，使预测未来变得可能。
他说完之后，一直面无表情聆听的日主十四说：“我觉得这是一种极其不可能的臆想。”
满面愁容的榭顿似乎有话要说，无疑是要表示观点。但夫铭原先轻放在谢顿膝上的一只手，此时却突然收紧，用意非常明显。
夫铭说：“有这个可能，元老，但皇上不这么想。话说回来，皇上本人是个相当敦厚的人物，我指的其实是丹莫茨尔，他的野心不必由我来告诉你。他们很想得到这两位学者，这就是我带他们来此避难的原因。我绝不相信你会为丹莫茨尔工作，将两位学者送到他的手上。”
“他们犯了一项重罪……”
“没错，我们知道，元老。可是这项罪名之所以成立。只是因为你选择要如此判定。它根本没有任何实质的伤害。”
“它对我们的信仰造成伤害，对我们内心最深的感情……”
“可是请你想想看，假如心理史学落入丹莫茨尔之手，那将造成什么样的伤害？没错，我承认也许什么事都不会发生，但是姑且假设有了结果，而帝国政府善加利用——能够预测未来会发生什么事；能够掌握独一无二的先见之明，并在它的指导之下采取对策。事实上，他们所采取的对策，必将是营造帝制所欲发展的另一种未来。”
“怎么样的未来？”
“帝制所欲发展的未来将是极度中央集权，元老，难道你对这点还有疑问吗？你很清楚，过去数世纪以来，帝国一直稳定地朝地方分权发展。如今，许多世界只在口头上承认皇帝，而实际上是在实行自治。甚至在川陀这里，也有地方分权的事实。麦曲生大部分的事务都不受皇权干涉，只是其中一个例子。你以元老的身份统治，没有帝国官员在旁监督你的行动和决策。假如让像丹莫茨尔那种人依照他们的喜好调整未来，你认为这种局面还能维持多久？”
“仍然是毫无根据的臆测，”日主十四说，“不过我必须承认，这听来的确令人不安。”
“另一方面，假设这两位学者能完成他们的工作——你也许会觉得可能性并不高，但这只是假设——那么他们一定会记得，你在没必要那样做的时候，曾经对他们网开一面。然后我们不难想见，他们会研究出如何安排一个未来，比如说，能让麦曲生得到一个自己的世界，一个能改造成和失落世界极为相似的世界。即使这两位忘了你的仁慈，我也会从旁提醒他们。”
“这……”日主十四支吾着。
“好啦，”夫铭说，“你心里究竟在怎么想，实在不难判定。在所有的外族人当中，你最不相信的一定是丹莫茨尔。虽然心理史学成功的机会不大（要不是我对你诚实，我也不会承认这一点），但并不等于零；如果它能帮你们重建失落世界，你又夫复何求？难道你不愿为这件事冒一丝风险？好啦！我向你承诺——你知道我从不轻易承诺任何事。把这两位放了，为你内心的愿望留点机会，总比全然无望要好。”
在一阵沉默后，日主十四叹了一声：“我不知道怎么回事，外族男子夫铭，可是我们每次见面，你总是说服我做些并非我真正想做的事。”
“我曾经误导过你吗．元老？”
“你提出的条件，机会从来没这么小。”
“而可能的报偿却那么高，两者互相扯平了。”
日主十四点了点头：“你说得没错。把这两个人带走，带他们离开麦曲生，永远不要让我再见到他们。除非有一天……但那绝不是在我有生之年。”
“或许如此，元老，可是你的族人已耐心等待了近两万年。难道你们拒绝再等上个……也许两百年？”
“我一刻也不愿再等，但不论需要多少时间，我的族人都会等下去。”
他一面起身，一面说道：“我会叫人通通让开，带他们走吧！”
Chapter 60

They were finally back in a tunnel. Hummin and Seldon had traveled through one when they went from the Imperial Sector to Streeling University in the air-taxi. Now they were in another tunnel, going from Mycogen to ... Seldon did not know where. He hesitated to ask. Hummins face seemed as if it was carved out of granite and it didnt welcome conversation.
Hummin sat in the front of the four-seater, with no one to his right. Seldon and Dors shared the backseat.
Seldon chanced a smile at Dors, who looked glum. "Its nice to be in real clothes again, isnt it?"
"I will never," said Dors with enormous sincerity, "wear or look at anything that resembles a kirtle. And I will never, under any circumstances, wear a skincap. In fact, Im going to feel odd if I ever see a normally bald man." And it was Dors who finally asked the question that Seldon had been reluctant to advance. "Chetter," she said rather petulantly, "why wont you tell us where were going?"
Hummin hitched himself into a sideways position and he looked back at Dors and Seldon gravely. "Somewhere," he said, "where it may be difficult for you to get into trouble--although Im not sure such a place exists."
Dors was at once crestfallen. "Actually, Chetter, its my fault. At Streeling, I let Hari go Upperside without accompanying him. In Mycogen, I at least accompanied him, but I suppose I ought not to have let him enter the Sacratorium at all."
"I was determined," said Seldon warmly. "It was in no way Dorss fault."
Hummin made no effort to apportion blame. He simply said, "I gather you wanted to see the robot. Was there a reason for that? Can you tell me?"
Seldon could feel himself redden. "I was wrong in that respect, Hummin. I did not see what I expected to see or what I hoped to see. If I had known the content of the aerie, I would never have bothered going there. Call it a complete fiasco."
"But then, Seldon, what was it you hoped to see? Please tell me. Take your time if you wish. This is a long trip and I am willing to listen."
"The thing is, Hummin, that I had the idea that there were humaniform robots, that they were long-lived, that at least one might still be alive, and that it might be in the aerie. There was a robot there, but it was metallic, it was dead, and it was merely a symbol. Had I but known--"
"Yes. Did we all but know, there would be no need for questions or for research of any kind. Where did you get your information about humaniform robots? Since no Mycogenian would have discussed that with you, I can think of only one source. The Mycogenian Book--a powered print-book in ancient Auroran and modern Galactic. Am I right?"
"Yes."
"And how did you get a copy?"
Seldon paused, then muttered, "Its somewhat embarrassing."
"I am not easily embarrassed, Seldon."
Seldon told him and Hummin allowed a very small smile to twitch across his face.
Hummin said, "Didnt it occur to you that what occurred had to be a charade? No Sister would do a thing like that--except under instruction and with a great deal of persuading."
Seldon frowned and said with asperity, "That was not at all obvious. People are perverted now and then. And its easy for you to grin. I didnt have the information you had and neither did Dors. If you did not wish me to fall into traps, you might have warned me of those that existed."
"I agree. I withdraw my remark. In any case, you dont have the Book any longer, Im sure."
"No. Sunmaster Fourteen took it from me."
"How much of it did you read?"
"Only a small fraction. I didnt have time. Its a huge book and I must tell you, Hummin, it is dreadfully dull."
"Yes, I know that, for I think I have read more of it than you have. It is not only dull, it is totally unreliable. It is a one-sided, official Mycogenian view of history that is more intent on presenting that view than a reasoned objectivity. It is even deliberately unclear in spots so that outsiders--even if they were to read the Book--would never know entirely what they read. What was it, for instance, that you thought you read about robots that interested you?"
"Ive already told you. They speak of humaniform robots, robots that could not be distinguished from human beings in outward appearance."
"How many of these would exist?" asked Hummin. "They dont say.--At least, I didnt come across a passage in which they gave numbers. There may have been only a handful, but one of them, the Book refers to as Renegade. It seems to have an unpleasant significance, but I couldnt make out what."
"You didnt tell me anything about that," interposed Dors. "If you had, I would have told you that its not a proper name. Its another archaic word and it means, roughly, what traitor would mean in Galactic. The older word has a greater aura of fear about it. A traitor, somehow, sneaks to his treason, but a renegade flaunts it."
Hummin said, "Ill leave the fine points of archaic language to you, Dors, but, in any case, if the Renegade actually existed and if it was a humaniform robot, then, clearly, as a traitor and enemy, it would not be preserved and venerated in the Elders aerie."
Seldon said, "I didnt know the meaning of Renegade, but, as I said, I did get the impression that it was an enemy. I thought it might have been defeated and preserved as a reminder of the Mycogenian triumph."
"Was there any indication in the Book that the Renegade was defeated?"
"No, but I might have missed that portion--"
"Not likely. Any Mycogenian victory would be announced in the Book unmistakably and referred to over and over again."
"There was another point the Book made about the Renegade," said Seldon, hesitating, "but I cant be at all sure I understood it." Hummin said, "As I told you ... They are deliberately obscure at times."
"Nevertheless, they seemed to say that the Renegade could somehow tap human emotions ... influence them--"
"Any politician can," said Hummin with a shrug. "Its called charisma--when it works."
Seldon sighed. "Well, I wanted to believe. That was it. I would have given a great deal to find an ancient humaniform robot that was still alive and that I could question."
"For what purpose?" asked Hummin.
"To learn the details of the primordial Galactic society when it still consisted of only a handful of worlds. From so small a Galaxy psychohistory could be deduced more easily."
Hummin said, "Are you sure you could trust what you heard? After many thousands of years, would you be willing to rely on the robots early memories? How much distortion would have entered into them?"
"Thats right," said Dors suddenly. "It would be like the computerized records I told you of, Hari. Slowly, those robot memories would be discarded, lost, erased, distorted. You can only go back so far and the farther you go back, the less reliable the information becomes--no matter what you do."
Hummin nodded. "Ive heard it referred to as a kind of uncertainty principle in information."
"But wouldnt it be possible," said Seldon thoughtfully, "that some information, for special reasons, would be preserved? Parts of the Mycogenian Book may well refer to events of twenty thousand years ago and yet be very largely as it had been originally. The more valued and the more carefully preserved particular information is, the more long-lasting and accurate it may be."
"The key word is particular. What the Book may care to preserve may not be what you wish to have preserved and what a robot may remember best may be what you wish him to remember least."
Seldon said in despair, "In whatever direction I turn to seek a way of working out psychohistory, matters so arrange themselves as to make it impossible. Why bother trying?"
"It might seem hopeless now," said Hummin unemotionally, "but given the necessary genius, a route to psychohistory may be found that none of us would at this moment expect. Give yourself more time.--But were coming to a rest area. Let us pull off and have dinner."
Over the lamb patties on rather tasteless bread (most unpalatable after the fare at Mycogen), Seldon said, "You seem to assume, Hummin, that I am the possessor of the necessary genius. I may not be, you know."
Hummin said, "Thats true. You may not be. However, I know of no alternate candidate for the post, so I must cling to you."
And Seldon sighed and said, "Well, Ill try, but Im out of any spark of hope. Possible but not practical, I said to begin with, and Im more convinced of that now than I ever was before."
Heatsink
AMARYL, YUGO-- ... A mathematician who, next to Hari Seldon himself, may be considered most responsible for working out the details of psychohistory. It was he who ...
... Yet the conditions under which he began life are almost more dramatic than his mathematical accomplishments. Born into the hopeless poverty of the lower classes of Dahl, a sector of ancient Trantor, he might have passed his life in utter obscurity were it not for the fact that Seldon, quite by accident, encountered him in the course of ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第六十章
　　他们终于回到一条隧道内。当夫铭与谢顿驾着出租飞车，从皇区前往川陀大学时，就曾经穿越过这样一条隧道。如今他们置身于另一条隧道，正从麦曲生前往……谢顿不知道要去哪里。他不太敢开口发问，夫铭的脸庞像是花岗岩雕出来的，最好别说话招惹他。
夫铭坐在这辆四座飞车的前座，右边的座位是空的，谢顿与铎丝则分坐在后座两侧。
谢顿对看来闷闷不乐的铎丝试探性地笑了笑：“能再穿上真正的衣服真好，埘吧？”
“我再也不要——”铎丝以极其正经的口吻说，“穿上或看到任何像裰服的东西。而且不论在仟何情况下，我绝对不要再戴上人皮帽。事实上，即使再看到一个普通的秃子，我都会有一种奇怪的感觉。”
谢顿一直不愿开口提的那个问题，最后由铎丝问了出来。“契特，”她以颇为暴躁的口气说，“你为何不告诉我们要到哪里去？”
夫铭挪到侧面的位置，然后回过头来，以严肃的表情望着铎丝与谢顿。“到某处去，”他说，“一个你们或许不容易惹麻烦的地方，但我不确定这种地方是否存在。”
铎丝立刻像是泄了气似的。“事实上，契特，这都是我的错。在斯璀璘的时候，我让哈里一个人到穹顶上去；而在麦曲生，我虽然陪他一起冒险，可是我根本就不该让他进入圣堂。”
“我当时心意已决，”谢顿热切地说，“那绝不是铎丝的错。”
夫铭并未评断两人该各受多少责难，他只是说：“我猜你是想去看那个机器人。有没有一个好理由？你能告诉我吗？”
谢顿感到自己脸红了：“这件事我错了，夫铭。我并未见到我预期的，或是希望见到的东西，要是事先知道长老阁里有些什么，我绝对懒得到那里去。这次真可说是一败涂地。”
“可是，谢顿，你希望见到的是什么呢？请告诉我。有需要的话不妨慢慢说，这是一趟长途旅行。我愿意洗耳恭听。”
“事情是这样的，夫铭。我得到一些概念：世上有人形机器人存在，它们的寿命很长，至少有一个可能还活着，而它可能就往长老阁中。那里的确有个机器人，但它却是金属制品，已经死了，而且仅是一种象征。我要是早知道……”
“没错，我们要是都早知道，任何种类的问题或研究便一概没有必要。有关人形机器人的数据，你是从哪里获得的？既然没有任何麦曲生人会和你讨论这种事，我只能想到一个来源：麦曲生的典籍，古奥罗拉语和银河标准语对照的电动印刷书。我说对了吗？”
“没错。”
“你是怎么拿到的？”
顿了一下之后，谢顿喃喃说道：“这件事有些令人脸红。”
“我没那么容易脸红，谢顿。”
于是谢顿一五一十告诉了他。夫铭听完后，脸上掠过一丝很淡的笑容。
夫铭说：“难道你就没想到，这一切必定是个哑谜游戏？没有姐妹会做那种事，除非是奉命，而且经过极力劝说。”
谢顿皱起眉头，粗暴地说：“这点根本不是显而易见，人们随时随地会有违常的举动。你咧嘴笑笑倒很容易，我没有你所掌握的情报，铎丝也不知道。如果你不希望我落入陷阱，就该事先警告我哪里有圈套。”
“我同意，我收回刚才的话。无论如何，那本典籍已经不在你身上，我可以肯定。”
“没错，日主十四把它拿走了。”
“你读了多少内容？”
“只有一小部分，我没多少时间。那是一本大书，而且我得告诉你，夫铭，它实在无聊极了。”
“没错，这我知道，因为我想这本书我比你读的还多。它不只无聊，而且完全不足采信。它是麦曲生官方单方面的历史观，主要目的是为了阐扬那个史观，并非提出理性客观的论述。在某些地方，它甚至故意语焉不详，好让外人即使有机会读到这本典籍，也永远无法完全了解读的是什么。比方说，令你感兴趣的有关机器人的记载，你认为内容究竟是些什么？”
“我已经告诉过你。他们提到人形机器人，从外表看来，这些机器人无法和真人区分。”
“它们总共有多少？”夫铭问，
“他们没有说。至少，我没发现哪一段记载着数量。也许为数不多，但是其中有一个，典籍中称之为‘变节者’。它似乎具有负面意义，但我无法查出是什么意思。”
“这点你完全没告诉我，”铎丝插嘴道，“假如你说了，我就会告诉你它并非专有名词，而是另一个古老的词汇，和银河标准语中的‘叛徒’意思差不多。不过这个古词具有更可怕的意义，叛徒对叛变行径多少还会遮掩，可是变节者却会大肆夸耀。”
夫铭说：“我把古代语文的细节留给你研究，铎丝。不过无论如何，假如那个变节者果真存在，又假如它是个人形机器人，那么显而易见的是，身为一名叛徒和敌人，它不会被保存和供奉在长老阁中。”
谢顿说：“我原本不知道变节者的意义，但正如我所说，我得到的印象是，它是敌非友。我想它后来可能被打败了，将它保存下来是为了纪念麦曲生的胜利。”
“典籍中提到变节者被打败了吗？”
“没有，但也许是我漏读了那一部分……”
“不太可能。麦曲生的任何胜利必定会在典籍中大肆宣扬，而且会一而再、再而三地提及。”
“关于这个变节者，典籍中还提到另外一点，”谢顿以迟疑的口气说，“但我无法绝对确定我看懂了。”
夫铭说：“正如我告诉你的——他们有时故意含糊其辞。”
“然而，他们似乎提到，那个变节者有办法利用……或影响人类的情感。”
“任何政治人物都能做到，”夫铭耸了耸肩，“它叫做领袖魅力——只要奏效的话。”
谢顿叹了一声：“嗯，当初我偏偏愿意相信，事情就是这样。那时为了找到一个古代的人形机器人，我情愿付出很高的代价，只要它仍旧活着，而且我能向它发问。”
“为了什么目的？”夫铭问。
“我想了解太初银河社会的细节。它当时只包含少数几个世界，从这么小的一个银河中，心理史学比较容易推导出来。”
夫铭说：“你确定能相信道听途说的事吗？经过上万年的时间，你还愿意信赖那个机器人的早期记忆？那里面会有多少扭曲？”
“说得没错，”铎丝突然说．“这就像我跟你提过的那些计算机化记录，哈里。日久天长，机器人的那些记忆会慢慢被抛舟、遗失、清除、扭曲。你只能追溯到某个限度，而且越往前追溯，那些数据就变得越不可靠——不论你怎么做都没用。”
“难道就没有町能，”谢顿若有所思地说，“某些数据由于特别的原因，而会一直保存下来？麦曲生典籍记载的一部分，很可能是两万年前的事迹，而其中绝大部分都是第一手史料。越是珍贵、越是谨慎保存的特殊资料，就越能持久且越为正确。”
“关键在于‘特殊’两个字。那本典籍想要保存的资料，不一定是你希望保存的；一个机器人记得最清楚的事，说不定是你最不希望它记得的。”
谢顿以绝望的口吻说：“不论我朝哪个方向寻找建立心理史学的方法，到头来总是变得绝无可能。何必再自找麻烦呢？”
“现在似乎是没有希望，”夫铭以毫无情绪的语调说，“但只要有必要的天分，也许我们终能找到一条通往心理史学的大道，它是大家此时此刻无法预见的。再多给你自己一些时间——我们就要到一个休息区，让我们开出去吃顿晚餐。”
在吃羔羊肉饼的时候（外面的面包平淡无味，尤其在吃惯麦曲生的美食后，更令人觉得难以消受），谢顿说：“你似乎做了一项假设，夫铭，我就是那个‘必要天分’的拥有者。你该知道，我也许不是。”
夫铭说：“这倒是真的，你也许不是。然而，我不知道还有其他的替代人选，所以我必须抓着你不放。”
谢顿叹了一口气：“好吧，我会试试看，但我已看不见任何希望的火花。有可能却不切实际，我一开始就这么说，现在我比任何时候更加确信。”
Chapter 61
The Emperor of all the Galaxy felt weary--physically weary. His lips ached from the gracious smile he had had to place on his face at careful intervals. His neck was stiff from having inclined his head this way and that in a feigned show of interest. His ears pained from having to listen. His whole body throbbed from having to rise and to sit and to turn and to hold out his hand and to nod. It was merely a state function where one had to meet Mayors and Viceroys and Ministers and their wives or husbands from here and there in Trantor and (worse) from here and there in the Galaxy. There were nearly a thousand present, all in costumes that varied from the ornate to the downright outlandish, and he had had to listen to a babble of different accents made the worse by an effort to speak the Emperors Galactic as spoken at the Galactic University. Worst of all, the Emperor had had to remember to avoid making commitments of substance, while freely applying the lotion of words without substance. All had been recorded, sight and sound--very discreetly--and Eto Demerzel would go over it to see if Cleon, First of that Name, had behaved himself. That, of course, was only the way that the Emperor put it to himself. Demerzel would surely say that he was merely collecting data on any unintentional self-revelation on the pan of the guests. And perhaps he was. Fortunate Demerzel!
The Emperor could not leave the Palace and its extensive grounds, while Demerzel could range the Galaxy if he wished. The Emperor was always on display, always accessible, always forced to deal with visitors, from the important to the merely intrusive. Demerzel remained anonymous and never allowed himself to be seen inside the Palace grounds. He remained merely a fearsome name and an invisible (and therefore the more frightening) presence. The Emperor was the Inside Man with all the trappings and emoluments of power. Demerzel was the Outside Man, with nothing evident, not even a formal title, but with his fingers and mind probing everywhere and asking for no reward for his tireless labors but one--the reality of power.
It amused the Emperor--in a macabre sort of way--to consider that, at any moment, without warning, with a manufactured excuse or with none at all, he could have Demerzel arrested, imprisoned, exiled, tortured, or executed. After all, in these annoying centuries of constant unrest, the Emperor might have difficulty in exerting his will over the various planets of the Empire, even over the various sectors of Trantor--with their rabble of local executives and legislatures that he was forced to deal with in a maze of interlocking decrees, protocols, commitments, treaties, and general interstellar legalities--but at least his powers remained absolute over the Palace and its grounds. And yet Cleon knew that his dreams of power were useless. Demerzel had served his father and Cleon could not remember a time when he did not turn to Demerzel for everything. It was Demerzel who knew it all, devised it all, did it all. More than that, it was on Demerzel that anything that went wrong could be blamed. The Emperor himself remained above criticism and had nothing to fear--except, of course, palace coups and assassination by his nearest and dearest. It was to prevent this, above all, that he depended upon Demerzel. Emperor Cleon felt a tiny shudder at the thought of trying to do without Demerzel. There had been Emperors who had ruled personally, who had had a series of Chiefs of Staff of no talent, who had had incompetents serving in the post and had kept them--and somehow they had gotten along for a time and after a fashion.
But Cleon could not. He needed Demerzel. In fact, now that the thought of assassination had come to him--and, in view of the modern history of the Empire, it was inevitable that it had come to him--he could see that getting rid of Demerzel was quite impossible. It couldnt be done. No matter how cleverly he, Cleon, would attempt to arrange it, Demerzel (he was sure) would anticipate the move somehow, would know it was on its way, and would arrange, with far superior cleverness, a palace coup. Cleon would be dead before Demerzel could possibly be taken away in chains and there would simply be another Emperor that Demerzel would serve--and dominate.
Or would Demerzel tire of the game and make himself Emperor? Never! The habit of anonymity was too strong in him. If Demerzel exposed himself to the world, then his powers, his wisdom, his luck (whatever it was) would surely desert him. Cleon was convinced of that. He felt it to be beyond dispute.
So while he behaved himself, Cleon was safe. With no ambitions of his own, Demerzel would serve him faithfully.
And now here was Demerzel, dressed so severely and simply that it made Cleon uneasily conscious of the useless ornamentation of his robes of state, now thankfully removed with the aid of two valets. Naturally, it would not be until he was alone and in dishabille that Demerzel would glide into view. "Demerzel," said the Emperor of all the Galaxy, "I am tired!"
"State functions are tiring, Sire," murmured Demerzel.
"Then must I have them every evening?"
"Not every evening, but they are essential. It gratifies others to see you and to be taken note of by you. It helps keep the Empire running smoothly."
"The Empire used to be kept running smoothly by power," said the Emperor somberly. "Now it must be kept running by a smile, a wave of the hand, a murmured word, and a medal or a plaque."
"If all that keeps the peace, Sire, there is much to be said for it. And your reign proceeds well."
"You know why--because I have you at my side. My only real gift is that I am aware of your importance." He looked at Demerzel slyly. "My son need not be my heir. He is not a talented boy. What if I make you my heir?"
Demerzel said freezingly, "Sire, that is unthinkable. I would not usurp the throne. I would not steal it from your rightful heir. Besides, if I have displeased you, punish me justly. Surely, nothing I have done or could possibly do deserves the punishment of being made Emperor."
Cleon laughed. "For that true assessment of the value of the Imperial throne, Demerzel, I abandon any thought of punishing you. Come now, let us talk about something. I would sleep, but I am not yet ready for the ceremonies with which they put me to bed. Let us talk."
"About what, Sire?"
"About anything.--About that mathematician and his psychohistory. I think about him every once in a while, you know. I thought of him at dinner tonight. I wondered: What if a psychohistorical analysis would predict a method for making it possible to be an Emperor without endless ceremony?"
"I somehow think, Sire, that even the cleverest psychohistorian could not manage that."
"Well, tell me the latest. Is he still hiding among those peculiar baldheads of Mycogen? You promised you would winkle him out of there."
"So I did, Sire, and I moved in that direction, but I regret that I must say that I failed."
"Failed?" The Emperor allowed himself to frown. "I dont like that."
"Nor I, Sire. I planned to have the mathematician be encouraged to commit some blasphemous act--such acts are easy to commit in Mycogen, especially for an outsider--one that would call for severe punishment. The mathematician would then be forced to appeal to the Emperor and, as a result, we would get him. I planned it at the cost of insignificant concessions on our part--important to Mycogen, totally unimportant to us--and I meant to play no direct role in the arrangement. It was to be handled subtly."
"I dare say," said Cleon, "but it failed. Did the Mayor of Mycogen "He is called the High Elder, Sire."
"Do not quibble over titles. Did this High Elder refuse?"
"On the contrary, Sire, he agreed and the mathematician, Seldon, fell into the trap neatly."
"Well then?"
"He was allowed to leave unharmed."
"Why?" said Cleon indignantly.
"Of this I am not certain, Sire, but I suspect we were outbid."
"By whom? By the Mayor of Wye?"
"Possibly, Sire, but I doubt that. I have Wye under constant surveillance. If they had gained the mathematician, I would know it by now."
The Emperor was not merely frowning. He was clearly enraged. "Demerzel, this is bad. I am greatly displeased. A failure like this makes me wonder if you are perhaps not the man you once were. What measures shall we take against Mycogen for this clear defiance of the Emperors wishes?"
Demerzel bowed low in recognition of the storm unleashed, but he said in steely tones, "It would be a mistake to move against Mycogen now, Sire. The disruption that would follow would play into the hands of Wye."
"But we must do something."
"Perhaps not, Sire. It is not as bad as it may seem."
"How can it be not as bad as it seems?"
"Youll remember, Sire, that this mathematician was convinced that psychohistory was impractical."
"Of course I remember that, but that doesnt matter, does it? For our purposes?"
"Perhaps not. But if it were to become practical, it would serve our purposes to an infinitely great extent, Sire. And from what I have been able to find out, the mathematician is now attempting to make psychohistory practical. His blasphemous attempt in Mycogen was, I understand, part of an attempt at solving the problem of psychohistory. In that case, it may pay us, Sire, to leave him to himself. It will serve us better to pick him up when he is closer to his goal or has reached it."
"Not if Wye gets him first."
"That, I shall see to it, will not happen."
"In the same way that you succeeded in winkling the mathematician out of Mycogen just now?"
"I will not make a mistake the next time, Sire," said Demerzel coldly.
The Emperor said, "Demerzel, you had better not. I will not tolerate another mistake in this respect." And then he added pettishly, "I think I shall not sleep tonight after all."
第六十一章
第十三部 热闾
雨果•阿马瑞尔：——数学家，除了哈里•谢顿本人之外，他可算是对心理史学具体内容最有贡献的一位。是他……然而与他的数学成就比较起来，他的早年境况几乎更为传奇。他生于古川陀的达尔区，属于毫无希望的贫困低下阶级。
若非谢顿在相当意外的情况下遇到他，终其一生他都可能过着寒微的日子。
谢顿当时……
——《银河百科全书》


第六十一章
统治整个银河的皇帝感到一股倦意——生理上的倦意。他的嘴唇酸痛，因为他必须在适当时候将亲切的笑容摆在脸上；他的颈部僵硬，因为他刚才不断以各种角度低下头来，装出一副很感兴趣的样子；由于听觉得不到休息，他的耳朵感到疼痛；由于不得不常常起立、坐下、转身、伸手、点头，他整个身子都累得微微颤抖。
这只不过是一场国宴，但他得接见来自川陀各个角洛，还有（更糟的是）来自银河各个角落的众多区长、总督、部长以及他们的妻子或夫君。出席者将近一千人，都穿着各地的传统服装，从华丽无比到全然怪异应有尽有。此外，他还得忍受各种口音的唠叨，更糟的是他们都模仿帝国大学通用的银河标准语，只因那是皇上使用的语言。而最头痛的一件事则是：身为皇上，他在随口说些毫无内容的空话时，必须牢记避免做出任何实质的许诺。
一切都被非常谨慎地记录下来，包括影像与声音。事后伊图•丹莫茨尔会从头到尾看一遍，看看克里昂大帝一世是否行止得宜——这一点当然只是皇上自己的见解。丹莫茨尔一定会说，他只是在搜集客人无意中自行泄露的各种资料，或许他说的是真话。
幸运的丹莫刺尔！
皇上不能离开皇宫与外围的御苑，而丹莫扶尔只要愿意，随时都能遍巡银河。皇上总是陈列在皇宫，总是随时候教，总是被迫应酬一些访客——从真正重要的到不速之客都有。丹莫茨尔则始终销声匿迹，从不在皇宫御苑内让人看见。他只保持着一个令人生畏的名字，以及一个隐形（因此更为可怕）的存在。
皇上是权力的核心，亭有权力的一切外表与实惠。丹莫刺尔在权力的外围，表而上看来一无所有，甚至没有一个正式的头衔，但他的指掌与心灵却能探寻各个角落。他对自己的孜孜不倦别无所求，唯一要求的奖赏便是权力的本质。
皇上突然有个开心的想法——一种带有死亡气息的开心。他想到无论任何时候，在毫无预警的情况下，或是炮制一个供口，或是什么借口也不用，他都能将丹莫茨尔逮捕、监禁、放逐、严刑拷打或是处决。毕竟，在过去数个动荡不断的恼人世纪中，皇帝或许难以将意志延伸到帝国各行星上，甚至想在川陀各区贯彻也难——地方行政机关与立法机关满是乱臣贼子，使他每天必须面对千丝万缕、纠缠不清的无数法令、草案、约定、条约，以及一般性的星际法案。但是，至少在皇宫与御苑范围内，他仍旧拥有至高无上的绝对权力。
然而克里昂心知肚明，他的权力美梦根本徒劳无功。丹莫茨尔是父皇的老臣，在克里昂的记忆中，自已遇到任何问题总是转向丹莫茨尔求助，从来没有一次例外。了解一切、筹划、七刀、执行一切的都是丹其茨尔。更重要的是，假如任何事出了纰漏，都可以怪罪到丹莫茨尔头上。皇上本人高高在上，永远不受批判，因此心中毫无畏惧——当然也有例外，那就是担心发生宫廷政变，自己被最亲、最近的人行刺。而这一点正是他仰仗丹莫茨尔最重要的原因。
将丹莫茨尔除掉，自己接掌一切的念头，令克里昂大帝感到全身做微打颤。过去，的确有些皇帝亲自治理帝国，他们的行政首长个个是庸才。他们让无能之荤占着这个职位，从米不想撤换——而在短时间内，他们竟然也能凑合着应付过去。
可是克里昂不行，他需要丹莫茨尔。事实上，既然他想到了行刺的可能性——鉴于帝国近代史．他心中兴起这种念头是必然的——他能看出除掉丹莫茨尔是相当不可能的事，根本就做不到。不论他，克里昂，以多么高明的手法暗中部署，丹莫茨尔总有办法（他确定）预见这个行动，会知道它正在默默进行，会以高明许多倍的手腕，安排一场宫廷政变。在丹莫茨尔有可能被五花大绑押走之前，克里昂自己就会丧命。然后很快会出现另一个皇帝，丹莫茨尔将继续侍奉他——并且驾驭他。
或者丹莫茨尔会厌倦了这种游戏，自己做起皇帝来？
绝对不会！他隐身幕后的习惯太过根深蒂固。假若丹莫茨尔让自己在世上曝光，那么他的权力、他的智慧、他的运气（不论那是什么）必将弃他而去。克里昂深信这点，觉得毋庸置疑。
所以只要安分守己，克里昂就安全无虞。因为丹莫茨尔本人并无野心，他会忠心地侍奉自己。
现在丹莫茨尔就在这里，他的穿着如此简单朴素，使克里昂对自己礼袍上那些无用的装饰生出不安的感觉，还好刚才在两个侍仆的帮助下，他已经把礼袍脱下来了。自然，总要等到他一人独处，并且换上便装之后，丹莫茨尔这个角色才会翩然出场。
“丹莫茨尔，”统治整个银河的皇帝说，“我累了！”
“国宴是一件累人的事，陛下。”丹莫茨尔喃喃地说。
“那我必须每天晚上来一场吗？”
“井非每天晚上，但它们是很重要的。能亲自觐见您以及让您注意到的人，都会感到心满意足。这能帮助帝国的运作保持一帆风顺。”
“过去，帝国是靠权力来保持一帆风顺。”皇上以阴郁的口吻说，“如今，却必须以一个微笑、一个挥手的动作，一句低声的言语，以及一枚勋章或奖章来保持运作。”
“如果这些能保持太平，陛下，那就非常值得这么做。而您的统治一向相当成功。”
“你知道为什么吗——因为我有你在我的身旁。我唯一真正的天赋．就是了解你的重要性。”他以狡猾的眼光望着丹莫茨尔，“我的儿子不一定要做我的继位者，他不是个才能出众的孩子。我让你当我的继位者如何？”
丹莫茨尔以冷冰冰的门吻说：“陛下，您怎么会有这种念头呢？我绝不会篡夺皇位，不会将它从合法继位者手中偷走。此外，若是我得罪了您，请以公平的方式惩处我。无论如何，我所做过的一切，或是可能做的任何事，都没有严重到需要以皇位作为惩罚。”
克里昂哈哈大笑：“冲着你对皇位的价值所做的真实评价，丹莫茨尔，我打消一切想要处罚你的念头。好啦，让我们谈一谈。待会儿我将要就寝，但我现存还不准备接受侍候我上床的那些繁文缛节。让我们聊聊吧。”
“聊些什么，陛下？”
“聊任何事情——聊聊那个数学家和他的心理史学。我每隔一段时间就会想到他，你知道吗。今晚在晚宴上我又想到他，我暗自嘀咕：心理史学分析若是能预测出一个方法，能让我这个皇帝避免无休无止的繁文缛节，那会是什么样的局面？”
“我却有一个想法，陛下，即使最高明的心理史学家也无法做到这点。”
“好吧，告诉我最新状况。他仍旧躲在麦曲生那些古怪的光头之间吗？你答应过我，你会把他从那里揪出来。”
“我的确答应过，陛下，我曾经朝这方面进行。但是很遗憾，我必须承认我失败了。”
“失败了？”皇上皱起眉头，“我不喜欢这种事。”
“我也不喜欢，陛下。我计划引诱那个数学家做出某种亵渎行为，会遭致严重惩罚的那种——在麦曲生很容易触犯亵渎罪，尤其对一个外族人而言。然后，那个数学家会被迫向皇上上诉，这样一来，我们就能得到他。根据我的计划，我们付出的代价只是微不足道的让步——对麦曲生很重要，对我们完仝无关痛痒。在我的部署中，我未打算直接参与，而是要巧妙地操纵这次行动。”
“我也这么想，”克里昂说道，“但是它失败了。难道是麦曲生的区长……”
“他被尊称为元老，陛下。”
“别跟我争辩头衔，这个元老拒绝合作吗？”
“恰恰相反，陛下，他一口答应了。而那个数学家，谢顿，一下子就掉进陷阱里。”
“那后来呢？”
“他获准离开，毫发无损。”
“为什么？”克里昂气冲冲地说。
“这件事我还不确定，陛下，但我怀疑有人出更高的价。”
“什么人？卫荷区长吗？”
“有可能，陛下，可是我对这点存疑。我将卫荷置于不断监视之下，假如他们得到那个数学家，我现在就应该知道了。”
此时皇上不只是皱眉，他显然火冒三丈：“丹莫茨尔，这太糟了，我非常不高兴。像这样子的失败，令我不禁怀疑你是否变成了另一个人。麦曲生这种显然违抗皇帝意旨的行为，我们应该采取什么手段教训一番？”
丹莫茨尔察觉一股奔腾的怒火，赶紧深深弯下腰来，但仍以钢铁般坚定的语气说：“现在对麦曲生采取行动将是个错误，陛下。因此造成的分裂，会被卫荷收为渔翁之利。”
“但我们必须做点什么。”
“或许什么都不该做，陛下，事态不如表而看来那么糟。”
“怎么会不如表面看来那么糟？”
“您应该记得，陛下，这个数学家深信心理史学不切实际。”
“我当然记得这点，可是这根本不重要，对不对？对我们的目的而言？”
“或许是吧。但假使它能变得可行，对我们的帮助将会大得难以估量，陛下。而根据我所能查出的线索，那个数学家正试图使心理史学成为可行。他在麦曲生的亵渎行为，据我了解，是他试图解决心理史学问题的努力之一。在这种情况下，陛下，我们暂时不去碰他。当他接近或达到目标的时候，我们再把他抓起来，这样对我们会更有用。”
“要是卫荷先得到他就不会了。”
“这件事我会盯牢，确保它不会发生。”
“就像你刚刚成功地将那个数学家揪出麦曲生一样？”
“下次我不会再犯错了，陛下。”丹莫茨尔冷静地说。
皇上说道：“丹莫茨尔，你最妤不会。在这件事情上，我绝不再容忍另一个错误。”
然后，他又没好气地补充一句：“我看今晚我根本别睡了。”
Chapter 62

Jirad Tisalver of the Dahl Sector was short. The top of his head came up only to Hari Seldons nose. He did not seem to take that to heart, however. He had handsome, even features, was given to smiling, and sported a thick black mustache and crisply curling black hair.
He lived, with his wife and a half-grown daughter, in an apartment of seven small rooms, kept meticulously clean, but almost bare of furnishings. Tisalver said, "I apologize, Master Seldon and Mistress Venabili, that I cannot give you the luxury to which you must be accustomed, but Dahl is a poor sector and I am not even among the better-off among our people."
"The more reason," responded Seldon, "that we must apologize to you for placing the burden of our presence upon you."
"No burden, Master Seldon. Master Hummin has arranged to pay us generously for your use of our humble quarters and the credits would be welcome even if you were not--and you are."
Seldon remembered Hummins parting words when they finally arrived in Dahl. "Seldon" he had said, "this is the third place Ive arranged as sanctuary. The first two were notoriously beyond the reach of the Imperium, which might well have served to attract their attention; after all, they were logical places for you. This one is different. It is poor, unremarkable, and, as a matter of fact, unsafe in some ways. It is not a natural refuge for you, so that the Emperor and his Chief of Staff may not think to turn their eyes in this direction. Would you mind staying out of trouble this time, then?"
"I will try, Hummin," said Seldon, a little offended. "Please be aware that the trouble is not of my seeking. I am trying to learn what may well take me thirty lifetimes to learn if I am to have the slightest chance of organizing psychohistory."
"I understand," said Hummin. "Your efforts at learning brought you to Upperside in Streeling and to the Elders aerie in Mycogen and to who can guess where in Dahl. As for you, Dr. Venabili, I know youve been trying to take care of Seldon, but you must try harder. Get it fixed in your head that he is the most important person on Trantor--or in the Galaxy, for that matter--and that he must be kept secure at any cost."
"I will continue to do my best," said Dors stiffly. "And as for your host family, they have their peculiarities, but they are essentially good people with whom I have dealt before. Try not to get them in trouble either."
But Tisalver, at least, did not seem to anticipate trouble of any kind from his new tenants and his expressed pleasure at the company he now had--quite apart from the rent credits he would be getting--seemed quite sincere. He had never been outside Dahl and his appetite for tales of distant places was enormous. His wife too, bowing and smiling, would listen and their daughter, with a finger in her mouth, would allow one eye to peep from behind the door. It was usually after dinner, when the entire family assembled, that Seldon and Dors were expected to talk of the outside world. The food was plentiful enough, but it was bland and often tough. So soon after the tangy food of Mycogen, it was all but inedible.
The "table" was a long shelf against one wall and they ate standing up. Gentle questioning by Seldon elicited the fact that this was the usual situation among Dahlites as a whole and was not due to unusual poverty. Of course, Mistress Tisalver explained, there were those with high government jobs in Dahl who were prone to adopt all kinds of effete customs like chairs--she called them "body shelves"--but this was looked down upon by the solid middle class. Much as they disapproved of unnecessary luxury, though, the Tisalvers loved hearing about it, listening with a virtual storm of tongue-clicking when told of mattresses lifted on legs, of ornate chests and wardrobes, and of a superfluity of tableware.
They listened also to a description of Mycogenian customs, while Jirad Tisalver stroked his own hair complacently and made it quite obvious that he would as soon think of emasculation as of depilation. Mistress Tisalver was furious at any mention of female subservience and flatly refused to believe that the Sisters accepted it tranquilly.
They seized most, however, on Seldons. casual reference to the Imperial grounds. When, upon questioning, it turned out that Seldon had actually seen and spoken to the Emperor, a blanket of awe enveloped the family. It took a while before they dared ask questions and Seldon found that he could not satisfy them. He had not, after all, seen much of the grounds and even less of the Palace interior.
That disappointed the Tisalvers and they were unremitting in their attempts to elicit more. And, having heard of Seldons Imperial adventure, they found it hard to believe Dorss assertion that, for her part, she had never been anywhere in the Imperial grounds. Most of all, they rejected Seldons casual comment that the Emperor had talked and behaved very much as any ordinary human being would. That seemed utterly impossible to the Tisalvers. After three evenings of this, Seldon found himself tiring. He had, at first, welcomed the chance to do nothing for a while (during the day, at least) but view some of the history book-films that Dors recommended. The Tisalvers turned over their book-viewer to their guests during the day with good grace, though the little girl seemed unhappy and was sent over to a neighbors apartment to use theirs for her homework.
"It doesnt help," Seldon said restlessly in the security of his room after he had piped in some music to discourage eavesdropping. "I can see your fascination with history, but its all endless detail. Its a mountainous heap--no, a Galactic heap--of data in which I cant see the basic organization."
"I dare say," said Dors, "that there must have been a time when human beings saw no organization in the stars in the sky, but eventually they discovered the Galactic structure."
"And Im sure that took generations, not weeks. There must have been a time when physics seemed a mass of unrelated observations before the central natural laws were discovered and that took generations.--And what of the Tisalvers?"
"What of them? I think theyre being very nice."
"Theyre curious."
"Of course they are. Wouldnt you be if you were in their place?"
"But is it just curiosity? They seem to be ferociously interested in my meeting with the Emperor."
Dors seemed impatient. "Again ... its only natural. Wouldnt you be--if the situation was reversed?"
"It makes me nervous."
"Hummin brought us here."
"Yes, but hes not perfect. He brought me to the University and I was maneuvered Upperside. He brought us to Sunmaster Fourteen, who entrapped us. You know he did. Twice bitten, at least once shy. Im tired of being questioned."
"Then turn the tables, Hari. Arent you interested in Dahl?"
"Of course. What do you know about it to begin with?"
"Nothing. Its just one of more than eight hundred sectors and Ive only been on Trantor a little over two years."
"Exactly. And there are twenty-five million other worlds and Ive been on this problem only a little over two months.--I tell you. I want to go back to Helicon and take up a study of the mathematics of turbulence, which was my Ph.D. problem, and forget I ever saw--or thought I saw--that turbulence gave an insight into human society."
But that evening he said to Tisalver, "But you know, Master Tisalver, youve never told me what you do, the nature of your work."
"Me?" Tisalver placed his fingers on his chest, which was covered by the simple white T-shirt with nothing underneath, which seemed to be the standard male uniform in Dahl. "Nothing much. I work at the local holovision station in programming. Its very dull, but its a living."
"And its respectable," said Mistress Tisalver. "It means he doesnt have to work in the heatsinks."
"The heatsinks?" said Dors, lifting her light eyebrows and managing to look fascinated.
"Oh well," said Tisalver, "thats what Dahl is best known for. It isnt much, but forty billion people on Trantor need energy and we supply a lot of it. We dont get appreciated, but Id like to see some of the fancy sectors do without it."
Seldon looked confused. "Doesnt Trantor get its energy from solar power stations in orbit?"
"Some," said Tisalver, "and some from nuclear fusion stations out on the islands and some from microfusion motors and some from wind stations Upperside, but half"--he raised a finger in emphasis and his face looked unusually grave--"half comes from the heatsinks. There are heatsinks in lots of places, but none--none--as rich as those in Dahl. Are you serious that you dont know about the heatsinks? You sit there and stare at me."
Dors said quickly, "We are Outworlders, you know." (She had almost said tribespeople, but had caught herself in time.) "Especially Dr. Seldon. Hes only been on Trantor a couple of months."
"Really?" said Mistress Tisalver. She was a trifle shorter than her husband, was plump without quite being fat, had her dark hair drawn tightly back into a bun, and possessed rather beautiful dark eyes. Like her husband, she appeared to be in her thirties.
(After a period in Mycogen, not actually long in duration but intense, it struck Dors as odd to have a woman enter the conversation at will. How quickly modes and manners establish themselves, she thought, and made a mental note to mention that to Seldon--one more item for his psychohistory.) "Oh yes," she said. "Dr. Seldon is from Helicon."
Mistress Tisalver registered polite ignorance. "And where might that be?"
Dors said, "Why, its--" She turned to Seldon. "Where is it, Hari?" Seldon looked abashed. "To tell you the truth, I dont think I could locate it very easily on a Galactic model without looking up the coordinates. All I can say is that its on the other side of the central black hole from Trantor and getting there by hypership is rather a chore."
Mistress Tisalver said, "I dont think Jirad and I will ever be on a hypership."
"Someday, Casilia," said Tisalver cheerfully, "maybe we will. But tell us about Helicon, Master Seldon."
Seldon shook his head. "To me that would be dull. Its just a world, like any other. Only Trantor is different from all the rest. There are no heatsinks on Helicon--or probably anywhere else--except Trantor. Tell me about them."
("Only Trantor is different from all the rest." The sentence repeated itself in Seldons mind and for a moment he grasped at it, and for some reason Dorss hand-on-thigh story suddenly recurred to him, but Tisalver was speaking and it passed out of Seldons mind as quickly as it had entered.)
Tisalver said, "If you really want to know about heatsinks, I can show you." He turned to his wife. "Casilia, would you mind if tomorrow evening I take Master Seldon to the heatsinks."
"And me," said Dors quickly.
"And Mistress Venabili?"
Mistress Tisalver frowned and said sharply, "I dont think it would be a good idea. Our visitors would find it dull."
"I dont think so, Mistress Tisalver," said Seldon ingratiatingly. "We would very much like to see the heatsinks. We would be delighted if you would join us too ... and your little daughter--if she wants to come."
"To the heatsinks?" said Mistress Tisalver, stiffening. "Its no place at all for a decent woman."
Seldon felt embarrassed at his gaffe. "I meant no harm, Mistress Tisalver."
"No offense," said Tisalver. "Casilia thinks its beneath us and so it is, but as long as I dont work there, its no distress merely to visit and show it to guests. But it is uncomfortable and I would never get Casilia to dress properly."
They got up from their crouching positions. Dahlite "chairs" were merely molded plastic seats on small wheels and they cramped Seldons knees terribly and seemed to wiggle at his least body movement. The Tisalvers, however, had mastered the art of sitting firmly and rose without trouble and without needing to use their arms for help as Seldon had to. Dors also got up without trouble and Seldon once again marveled at her natural grace.
Before they parted to their separate rooms for the night, Seldon said to Dors, "Are you sure you know nothing about heatsinks? Mistress Tisalver makes them seem unpleasant."
"They cant be that unpleasant or Tisalver wouldnt suggest taking us on tour. Lets be content to be surprised."
第六十二章
　　达尔区的吉拉德•堤沙佛个子矮小，他的头顶只到谢顿的鼻尖。然而，他似乎没将这件事放在心上。他有一副英俊、端正的五官，总喜欢带着微笑，而且留着两撇又浓又黑的八字胡，以及一头波浪状的卷曲黑发。
他与他的妻子，以及一个半大的女儿，住在一栋有七个小房间的公寓中。他们小心翼翼地将这个家保持得很干净，但里面几乎没有什么家具。
堤沙佛说：“我很抱歉，谢顿老爷、凡纳比里夫人，你们一定习惯了豪华的生活，我却不能为你们提供那些享受。不过达尔是个穷地方，而我在我们同胞中也不能算混得好的。”
“正因为如此，”谢顿答道，“我们更是必须向你致歉，我们的出现给你带来很大负担。”
“没有负担，谢顿老爷。为了你们使用我们简陋的房舍，夫铭老爷慷慨地愿意付一大笔租金。即使我不欢迎你们，也会欢迎那些信用点——我只是开玩笑。”
谢顿还记得他们来到达尔后，夫铭在临别时说的一番话：“谢顿，”他说，“这是我帮你找的第三个避难所。前面那两个地方，都是出了名的皇帝势力不及之她，因此很有可能吸引他们的注意。毕竟对你而言，它们是合理的藏身之地。这个地方则不同，它相当贫穷，毫不起眼，而且事实上，可说并非十分安全。它不是你寻求庇护的自然选择，因此皇上和他的行政首长，也许不会想到将目光转到这个方向。所以说，这次你愿意别再惹麻烦吗？”
“我会努力的，夫铭。”谢顿有点不高兴，“请你明白一件事，我想找的并不是是麻烦。即使我有创立心理史学的一点点机会，我试图探寻的也很可能是需要三十辈子才能寻获的知识。”
“我了解，”夫铭说，“你为寻找答案所做的努力，把你带到了斯璀璘的穹顶上，以及麦曲生的长老阁中，谁能猜到你在达尔还会去哪里。至于你，凡纳比里博士，我知道你一直试图照顾谢顿，可是你必须更加努力。请务必记得，谢顿博士是川陀上最重要的人，甚至可说是全银河最重要的人物，你必须不计任何代价保护他的安全。”
“我会尽力而为。”铎丝以生硬的语气说。
“至于堤沙佛一家，我以前跟他们打过交道，他们有他们奇怪的地方，但他们本质上都是好人。你们也要尽量别给他们惹上麻烦。”
不过，至少堤沙佛似乎并未预期新房客会带来任何麻烦。他对他们的到来所表现的喜悦，似乎相当真诚——几乎与他将得到的租金无关。
他从未踏出过达尔，因此对远方的传闻胃口极大；总是点头哈腰、笑容满面的堤沙佛夫人也喜欢听。至于他们的女儿，则照例吮着一根于指，从门后露出一只眼睛偷窥。
通常是在晚餐后，当全家人聚在一起的时候，他们就会请求谢顿与铎丝讲述外面的世界。食物餐餐丰盛，不过淡而无味，而且总是相当粗糙。由于不久前才享受过香味扑鼻的麦曲生食品，两人感到这种食物几乎难以下咽。“餐桌”只是紧靠墙壁的一个长架子，所有的人全都站着进餐。
谢顿以委婉的方式问出了真相，原来这在达尔是相当寻常的状况，并非由于特别贫穷的缘故。当然，堤沙佛夫人解释道，达尔也有些身居政府高位的人，他们倾向于接受各种文明的习俗，比如说椅子——她称之为“身体架子”。不过，纯粹的中产阶级都瞧不起那些东西。
虽然他们对于没必要的奢侈不敢苟同，堤沙佛一家却很爱听这类叙述。当他们听到由脚架撑起的床垫、华丽的橱柜与衣橱，以及摆满餐桌的餐具时，总是一个劲地啧啧称奇。
他们也听到了有关麦曲生习俗的描述。当时，吉拉德•堤沙佛得意地摸摸自己的头发，意思显然是宁可去死也不愿接受脱毛手术。每当提到女性百依百顺时，堤沙佛大人总是气愤难当，根本拒绝相信姐妹们会默默接受这些待遇。
然而，他们最不放过的一点，则是谢顿随口提到的皇宫御苑。在进一步追问之下，他们发现谢顿不但亲眼见过皇上，并且还跟皇上说过话，一股敬畏的气氛立刻笼罩这一家人。过了好一会儿，他们才敢继续发问，谢顿却发觉自己无法满足他们。毕竟，他并未对御苑多做浏览，皇宫内部就更别提了。
这使得堤沙佛家人相当失望，于是他们穷追不舍。试图问出更多事情。在谢顿讲完他的皇宫历险之后，锋丝却声明自己从未踏进御苑一步，这令他们实在难以置信。谢顿曾经顺口说到，皇上的言行举止与普通人非常相近，这点他们尤其拒绝接受，对堤沙佛一家而言，那似乎是绝不可能的事。
经过三个这样的晚上之后，谢顿开始生厌。最初，他很高兴有机会暂时什么事也不做（至少白天如此），只是阅读几本铎丝推荐的历史胶卷书。堤沙佛家人表现得很大方，白天将他们自已的阅读机让给客人。只是小女孩似乎不太高兴，因为她被父母送到邻居的公寓，借用别人的阅读机做功课。
“这没有任何帮助。”谢顿烦躁不安地说，此时他关在自己房间，并弄出一些音乐以防有人窃听。“我可以看出你对历史如何着迷．但它全是无休无止的细节，是堆积如山——不，堆积如银河的数据，我根本无法看出它的基本规律。”
“我敢说，”铎丝说道，“过去一定曾有一段时期，人类看不出天上的星星有什么组织，但他们终究发现了银河结构。”
“我确信这得花上好些世代，并非仅仅几周的时间。过去也一定曾有一段时期，在核心自然定律发现之前，物理学似乎只是一堆毫无关联的观察结果，那些发现也需要许多世代——堤沙佛这家人是怎么回事？”
“他们又怎么了，我认为他们一直很不错。”
“他们太过好奇。”
“他们当然会，假如你是他们，难道你不会吗？”
“但那仅仅是好奇吗？他们对于我见过皇上这档事，好像有兴趣得不得了。”
铎丝似乎不耐烦了：“同理……这只是自然反应。难道你不会吗，要是刚好倒过来的话？”
“这使我神经紧张。”
“是夫铭把我们带到这儿来的。”
“没错，但他并非十全十美。他把我带去川陀大学，结果我被诱骗到穹顶上去；他带我们去找日主十四，那人却陷害我们，你该知道他早有预谋。上两次当，至少能学一次乖。我受够了被问东问西。”
“那就反客为主，哈里。你对达尔没有兴趣吗？”
“当然有，你原先对它了解多少？”
“一无所知。它不过是八百多个区之一，而我在川陀只有两年多一点。”
“正是如此。银河中有两千五百万个世界，而我研究这个问题才只有两个月多一点。我告诉你，我想要回赫利肯去，重新着于研究湍流的数学，那是我的博士论文题目。我要忘掉我曾经看出——或是自以为看出——湍流能对人类社会提供一种洞察。”
不过当天傍晚，他还是问堤沙佛说：“你可知道，堤沙佛老爷，你从未告诉我你做些什么、你的工作性质。”
“我？”堤沙佛将几根手指按在胸口。他穿着一件单薄的白色短衫，里面什么也没有，这似乎是达尔男性的标准制服。“没做什么，我在地方全息电视台做节日策划。非常无聊的差事，但我靠它养家糊口。”
“而且是个体面的职业，”堤沙佛夫人说，“这代表他不必在热闾工作。”
“热闾？”铎丝扬起淡淡的眉毛，显得很有兴趣。
“啊，”堤沙佛说，“那是达尔最出名的东西。虽然没什么，但川陀四百亿人口都需要能源，而我们提供其中很大一部分。没有人感谢我们，可是我倒真想看看，某些高级区失去能源后是什么情景。”
谢顿显得相当困惑：“川陀的能源不是来自轨道上的太阳能发电站吗？”
“部分而已，”堤沙佛说，“此外，部分来自一些岛上的核融合发电站，部分来自微融合发电机，部分来自穹顶上的风力发电站。可是有一半，”他举起一根手指加强语气，而且表情严肃异常？“有一半来自热闾。许多地方都有热闾，但没有一处——没有一处——像达尔的蕴藏这般丰富。你当真不知道热闾是什么吗？你坐住那里瞪着我猛瞧。”
铎丝很快接门道：“我们是外星人士，你也知道。”（她差一点就要说“外族人”，但及时煞住车。）“尤其是谢顿博士，他在川陀只待了几个月。”
“真的吗？”堤沙佛夫人说。她比她的丈夫稍矮一点，丰满伊不算肥胖，拥有一对相当美丽的黑眼珠。她的黑发梳在脑后，紧紧扎成一个发髻。就像她的丈夫一样，她看来也是三十几岁。
（在麦曲生住过一阵子之后，虽然并非真待了很久，但由于密集式的耳濡目染，如今对铎丝而言，女性随意加入男性的交谈是件很奇怪的事。风俗与习惯很容易不知不觉地建立起来，她想，并且在心中默记下这点，准备找机会对谢顿提一提，为他的心理史学再加上一条。）
“喔，是的。”她说，“谢顿博士来自赫利肯。”
堤沙佛夫人礼貌地表现出孤陋寡闻：“那是在哪里呢？”
铎丝说：“啊，它在……”她转向谢顿，“它究竟在哪里，哈里？”
谢顿显得难为情：“告诉你们一句实话，如果不查坐标，我想我也不容易在银河模型中找到它的位置。我只能说从川陀看心去，它位于中心黑洞的另一侧，搭超空间飞船到那里只是小事一桩。”
堤沙佛夫人说：“我想吉拉德和我永远不会登上超空间飞船。”
“总有一天，卡西莉娅，”堤沙佛以快活的口气说，“或许我们会有机会。但请对我们说说赫利肯，谢顿老爷。”
谢顿摇了摇头：“对我来说那是一件无聊的事。它只不过是个世界，就像任何世界一样，只有川陀才和其他所有世界不同。赫利肯上没有热闾，也许其他地方都没有，唯有川陀例外。告诉我有关热闾的种种。”
（“只有川陀才和其他所有世界不同。”这句话在谢顿心中一再重复，而有刹那的时间，它几乎在他的掌握中。不知道为什么，铎丝那个毛手毛脚的故事突然再度浮现。但由于堤沙佛已开始说话，那点灵光来得急也去得快，随即溜出了谢顿的心灵。）
堤沙佛说：“如果你真的想要了解热闾，我可以带你去参观。”他转头面向妻子，“卡西莉娅，如果明天傍晚我带谢顿老爷前往热闾，你会不会介意？’’“还有我。”铎丝立刻加上一句。
“还有凡纳比里夫人？”
堤沙佛夫人皱起眉头，以尖锐的声音说：“我认为那不是什么好主意，我们的客人会觉得很无聊。”
“我想不至于，堤沙佛夫人。”谢顿以逢迎的口气说，“我们非常希望去看看热闾，如果你也加入我们，我们会十分高兴……还有你的小女儿，如果她也想去的话。”
“到热闾去？”堤沙佛夫人的态度转趋强硬，“那根本不是一位端庄的妇人能去的地方。”
谢顿对自己的鲁莽感到尴尬：“我没有恶意，堤沙佛夫人。”
“没关系，”堤沙佛说，“卡西莉娅认为它是个低贱之地，事实也的确如此。但只要我不在那里工作，光是带客人参观一下倒无妨。不过那里很不舒服，卡西莉娅也找不到合适的衣服可穿。”
聊完之后，他们便从蹲伏的位置站起来。达尔的“椅子”只是个塑料坐垫，下面装了几个小轮子。谢顿的膝盖被它弄得几乎无法动弹，而且只要他的身子稍有挪动，这椅子似乎就会开始摆动。然而，堤沙佛一家却练就稳如泰山的本事，起身时也毫无困难，不像谢顿那样得借助手臂。铎丝也轻而易举就站起来，谢顿再次赞叹她表现的自然优雅。
在他们回到各自的房间就寝之前，谢顿对铎丝说：“你确定自己对热闾一无所知吗？听堤沙佛夫人的口气似乎不会怎么有趣。”
“应该不会无聊到什么程度，否则堤沙佛不会建议要带我们参观。让我们期待一场惊奇吧。”
Chapter 63
Tisalver said, "Youll need proper clothing." Mistress Tisalver sniffed markedly in the background.
Cautiously, Seldon, thinking of kirtles with vague distress, said, "What do you mean by proper clothing?"
"Something light, such as I wear. A T-shirt, very short sleeves, loose slacks, loose underpants, foot socks, open sandals. I have it all for you."
"Good. It doesnt sound bad."
"As for Mistress Venabili, I have the same. I hope it fits."
The clothes Tisalver supplied each of them (which were his own) fit fine--if a bit snugly. When they were ready, they bade Mistress Tisalver good-bye and she, with a resigned if still disapproving air, watched them from the doorway as they set off.
It was early evening and there was an attractive twilight glow above. It was clear that Dahls lights would soon be winking on. The temperature was mild and there were virtually no vehicles to be seen; everyone was walking. In the distance was the ever-present hum of an Expressway and the occasional glitter of its lights could be easily seen.
The Dahlites, Seldon noted, did not seem to be walking toward any particular destination. Rather, there seemed to be a promenade going on, a walking for pleasure. Perhaps, if Dahl was an impoverished sector, as Tisalver had implied, inexpensive entertainment was at a premium and what was as pleasant--and as inexpensive--as an evening stroll?
Seldon felt himself easing automatically into the gait of an aimless stroll himself and felt the warmth of friendliness all around him. People greeted each other as they passed and exchanged a few words. Black mustaches of different shape and thickness flashed everywhere and seemed a requisite for the Dahlite male, as ubiquitous as the bald heads of the Mycogenian Brothers. It was an evening rite, a way of making sure that another day had passed safely and that ones friends were still well and happy. And, it soon became apparent, Dors caught every eye. In the twilight glow, the ruddiness of her hair had deepened, but it stood out against the sea of black-haired heads (except for the occasional gray) like a gold coin winking its way across a pile of coal.
"This is very pleasant," said Seldon.
"It is," said Tisalver. "Ordinarily, Id be walking with my wife and shed be in her element. There is no one for a kilometer around whom she doesnt know by name, occupation, and interrelationships. I cant do that. Right now, half the people who greet me ... I couldnt tell you their names. But, in any case, we mustnt creep along too slowly. We must get to the elevator. Its a busy world on the lower levels."
They were on the elevator going down when Dors said, "I presume, Master Tisalver, that the heatsinks are places where the internal heat of Trantor is being used to produce steam that will turn turbines and produce electricity."
"Oh, no. Highly efficient large-scale thermopiles produce electricity directly. Dont ask me the details, please. Im just a holovision programmer. In fact, dont ask anyone the details down there. The whole thing is one big black box. It works, but no one knows how."
"What if something goes wrong?"
"It doesnt usually, but if it does, some expert comes over from somewhere. Someone who understands computers. The whole thing is highly computerized, of course."
The elevator came to a halt and they stepped out. A blast of heat struck them.
"Its hot," said Seldon quite unnecessarily.
"Yes, it is," said Tisalver. "Thats what makes Dahl so valuable as an energy source. The magma layer is nearer the surface here than it is anywhere else in the world. So you have to work in the heat."
"How about air-conditioning?" said Dors.
"There is air-conditioning, but its a matter of expense. We ventilate and dehumidify and cool, but if we go too far, then were using up too much energy and the whole process becomes too expensive."
Tisalver stopped at a door at which he signaled. It opened to a blast of cooler air and he muttered, "We ought to be able to get someone to help show us around and hell control the remarks that Mistress Venabili will otherwise be the victim of ... at least from the men."
"Remarks wont embarrass me," said Dors.
"They will embarrass me," said Tisalver.
A young man walked out of the office and introduced himself as Hano Linder. He resembled Tisalver quite closely, but Seldon decided that until he got used to the almost universal shortness, swarthiness, black hair, and luxuriant mustaches, he would not be able to see individual differences easily.
Lindor said, "Ill be glad to show you around for what there is to see. Its not one of your spectaculars, you know." He addressed them all, but his eyes were fixed on Dors. He said, "Its not going to be comfortable. I suggest we remove our shirts."
"Its nice and cool in here," said Seldon.
"Of course, but thats because were executives. Rank has its privileges. Out there we cant maintain air-conditioning at this level. Thats why they get paid more than I do. In fact, those are the best-paying jobs in Dahl, which is the only reason we get people to work down here. Even so, its getting harder to get heatsinkers all the time." He took a deep breath. "Okay, out into the soup." He removed his own shirt and tucked it into his waistband. Tisalver did the same and Seldon followed suit.
Linder glanced at Dors and said, "For your own comfort, Mistress, but its not compulsory."
"Thats all right," said Dors and removed her shirt.
Her brassiere was white, unpadded, and showed considerable cleavage. "Mistress," said Lindor, "Thats not--" He thought a moment, then shrugged and said, "All right. Well get by."
At first, Seldon was aware only of computers and machinery, huge pipes, flickering lights, and flashing screens.
The overall light was comparatively dim, though individual sections of machinery were illuminated. Seldon looked up into the almost-darkness. He said, "Why isnt it better lit?"
"Its lit well enough ... where it should be," said Lindor. His voice was well modulated and he spoke quickly, but a little harshly. "Overall illumination is kept low for psychological reasons. Too bright is translated, in the mind, into heat. Complaints go up when we turn up the lights, even when the temperature is made to go down."
Dors said, "It seems to be well computerized. I should think the operations could be turned over to computers altogether. This sort of environment is made for artificial intelligence."
"Perfectly right," said Lindor, "but neither can we take a chance on any failures. We need people on the spot if anything goes wrong. A malfunctioning computer can raise problems up to two thousand kilometers away."
"So can human error. Isnt that so?" said Seldon.
"Oh. yes, but with both people and computers on the job, computer error can be more quickly tracked down and corrected by people and, conversely, human error can be more quickly corrected by computers. What it amounts to is that nothing serious can happen unless human error and computer error take place simultaneously. And that hardly ever happens."
"Hardly ever, but not never, eh?" said Seldon. "Almost never, but not never. Computers arent what they used to be and neither are people."
"Thats the way it always seems," said Seldon, laughing slightly.
"No, no. Im not talking memory. Im not talking good old days. Im talking statistics."
At this, Seldon recalled Hummin talking of the degeneration of the times.
"See what I mean?" said Lindor, his voice dropping. "Theres a bunch of people, at the C-3 level from the looks of them, drinking. Not one of them is at his or her post."
"What are they drinking?" asked Dors.
"Special fluids for replacing electrolyte loss. Fruit juice."
"You cant blame them, can you?" said Dors indignantly. "In this dry heat, you would have to drink."
"Do you know how long a skilled C-3 can spin out a drink? And theres nothing to be done about it either. If we give them five-minute breaks for drinks and stagger them so they dont all congregate in a group, you simply stir up a rebellion."
They were approaching the group now. There were men and women (Dahl seemed to be a more or less amphisexual society) and both sexes were shirtless. The women wore devices that might be called brassieres, but they were strictly functional. They served to lift the breasts in order to improve ventilation and limit perspiration, but covered nothing.
Dors said in an aside to Seldon, "That makes sense, Hari. Im soaking wet there."
"Take off your brassiere, then," said Seldon. "I wont lift a finger to stop you."
"Somehow," said Dors, "I guessed you wouldnt." She left her brassiere where it was.
They were approaching the congregation of people--about a dozen of them.
Dors said, "If any of them make rude remarks, I shall survive."
"Thank you," said Lindor. "I cannot promise they wont.--But Ill have to introduce you. If they get the idea that you two are inspectors and in my company, theyll become unruly. Inspectors are supposed to poke around on their own without anyone from management overseeing them." He held up his arms.
"Heatsinkers, I have two introductions to make. We have visitors from outside--two Outworlders, two scholars. Theyve got worlds running short on energy and theyve come here to see how we do it here in Dahl. They think they may learn something."
"Theyll learn how to sweat!" shouted a heatsinker and there was raucous laughter.
"Shes got a sweaty chest right now," shouted a woman, "covering up like that." Dors shouted back, "Id take it off, but mine cant compete with yours."
The laughter turned good-natured.
But one young man stepped forward, staring at Seldon with intense deep-set eyes, his face set into a humorless mask. He said, "I know you. Youre the mathematician."
He ran forward, inspecting Seldons face with eager solemnity. Automatically, Dors stepped in front of Seldon and Lindor stepped in front of her, shouting, "Back, heatsinker. Mind your manners."
Seldon said, "Wait! Let him talk to me. Why is everyone piling in front of me?"
Lindor said in a low voice, "If any of them get close, youll find they dont smell like hothouse flowers."
"Ill endure it," said Seldon brusquely. "Young man, what is it you want?"
"My name is Amaryl. Yugo Amaryl. Ive seen you on holovision."
"You might have, but what about it?"
"I dont remember your name."
"You dont have to."
"You talked about something called psychohistory."
"You dont know how I wish I hadnt."
"What?"
"Nothing. What is it you want?"
"I want to talk to you. Just for a little while. Now."
Seldon looked at Lindor, who shook his head firmly. "Not while hes on his shift."
"When does your shift begin, Mr. Amaryl?" asked Seldon.
"Sixteen hundred."
"Can you see me tomorrow at fourteen hundred?"
"Sure. Where?"
Seldon turned to Tisalver. Would you permit me to see him in your place?"
Tisalver looked very unhappy. "Its not necessary. Hes just a heatsinker."
Seldon said, "He recognized my face. He knows something about me. He cant be just an anything. Ill see him in my room." And then, as Tisalvers face didnt soften, he added, "My room, for which rent is being paid. And youll be at work, out of the apartment."
Tisalver said in a low voice, "Its not me, Master Seldon. Its my wife, Casilia. She wont stand for it."
"Ill talk to her," said Seldon grimly. "Shell have to."
第六十三章
　　堤沙佛说：“你们需要适当的服装。”堤沙佛夫人则在背后发出一声明显的哼声。
细心的谢顿立刻想到裰服，心中泛起一阵模糊的懊恼。他说：“你说适当的服装是什么崽思？”
“轻便的衣服，像我穿的这种。袖子很短的短衫、宽松的家常裤、宽松的内衣拆、短袜、开口的凉鞋。我都为你们准备好了。”
“很好，听起来不错。”
“至于凡纳比里夫人，我也同样准备了一套，希望能合身。”
堤沙佛提供他们两人的服装（都是他自己的）十分合身，甚至可以说十分舒适。他们准备好之后，便向堤沙佛夫人告辞，她则带着仍不以为然却已放弃努力的神情，站在门口目送他们离去。
此时是傍晚时分，上空有一团迷人的昏黄暮光，显然达尔的灯火很快会纷纷眨眼。温度适中，街上几于见不到任何车辆，每个人都在步行。远处传来磁浮捷运无休无止的嗡嗡声，偶尔射来的灯光也不难看见。
谢顿注意到，这些达尔人似乎并非向特定目的地走去。反之，他们像是参加一次漫步游行，纯粹为了乐趣而走。假如达尔果真是个穷区，就像堤沙佛暗示的那样，则低廉的娱乐或许是很重要的一件事。还有什么比黄昏漫步更有乐趣，而且更廉价的呢？
谢顿很自然地融入这种毫无目标的闲适步调中，并且感到四周充满亲切的温暖。当人们擦身而过时，总会瓦相打个招呼，简单交谈几句。不同型式、不同粗细的黑色八字胡到处展现，仿佛是达尔男性的一项必备要件，如同麦曲生兄弟的光头一样无处不在。
这是个傍晚的仪式，用以确定又安稳过了一天，朋友们仍旧身体健康、精神愉快。有一件事很快变得显而易见，那就是铎丝吸引了所有人的日光。昏黄的暮色中，她略红的金发变得更加鲜红，在一片黑发海洋的衬托下（偶尔出现的灰发是唯一的例外），像一枚金币闪闪发光地掠过一堆煤炭。
“这实在非常愉快。”
“没错，”堤沙佛说，“通常，我都和我的妻了一起散步，她总是如鱼得水。在一公里范围内，任何人的名字、职业，以及互相之间的关系她都晓得。我做不到这点，现在这个时候，和我打招呼的人有一半……我无法告诉你他们的名字。但无论如何，我们绝不能走得太慢，我们必须走到升降机那里。底下的层级是个忙碌的世界。”
当他们进了往下的升降机后，铎丝说道：“我想所谓的热闾，堤沙佛老爷，是利用川陀的地热来产生蒸汽，以转动涡轮机来发电的地方。”
“噢，并非如此，这里是利用高效率的大型热电堆直接产生电力。别问我细节，拜托，我只是个全息电视节目策划人。事实上，到下面也别向任何人询问细节。整个东西是个很大的黑盒子，它能够运作，却没人知道是如何做到的。”
“如果出了什么问题呢？”
“通常都不会，但如果真出了问题，会有一些专家从别处赶来，那些懂得计算机的。当然，所有一切都是高度计算机化的。”
此时升降机停了下来，三人鱼贯而出，一阵热浪立刻扑向他们。
“真热。”谢顿多此一举地说。
“的确没错，”堤沙佛说，“这正是达尔成为能源珍贵产地的原因。这里的岩浆层比全球各处都更接近地表，所以你得在酷热之下工作。”
“何不采用空调设备呢？”
“是有空凋设备，不过这和成本有关。我们利用空调来通风、除湿、降温，但如果做得太过分，那会用掉太多能量，整个过程就会变得太昂贵。”
堤沙佛停在一扇门前，按下讯号钮。门开了之后，随即传出一阵凉风。他喃喃说道：“我们应该可以找到什么人，带我们四下参观一番。他能控制场面，否则凡纳比里夫人会被……至少男工就一定会对她冷嘲热讽。”
“冷嘲热讽不会令我感到尴尬。”铎丝说。
“会令我感到尴尬。”堤沙佛说。
一名自称汉诺•林德的年轻男子从办公室走出来，他长得跟堤沙佛十分相像，但谢顿心里明白，在他习惯几乎千篇一律的矮小身材、黝黑皮肤、黑色头发，以及浓密的八字胡之前，他无法轻易看出其中的个别差异。
林德说：“我很乐意带你们到值得看的地方四处看看。这不是你们心目中的奇观，你们要知道。”他在对他们三人说话，目光却固定在铎丝身上。“不会怎么舒服，我建议大家脱掉短衫。”
“这里十分凉爽。”谢顿说。
“当然，但那是因为我们是管理人员，阶级自有它的特权。在外面我们无法保持这么强的空调，这就是为什么他们领的薪水比我还多。事实上，在达尔它是薪资最高的工作，这是我们这里找得到工人的唯一原因。即使如此，热闾工还是一直越来越难找。”他深深吸了一口气，“好，我们钻进热锅去吧。”
他脱掉短衫，塞进腰带。堤沙佛也照做不误，谢顿则只有学样。
林德瞥了铎丝一眼，说道：“为你自己舒服，夫人，但这并非强迫性的。”
“没关系。”铎丝说完，便脱下她的短衫。
她的胸罩是白色的，没有衬里，中间开衩处颇为可观。
“夫人，”林德说，“那可不是……”他想了一会儿，然后耸耸肩，“没关系，我们过得了关。”
刚开始的时候，谢顿只注意到计算机与机械装置，包括巨大的输送管、明灭不定的灯光，以及闪烁的荧光幕。
整体的光线相当暗淡，不过机件附近都有充足的照明。谢顿抬起头，望着几乎全暗的环境说：“为什么不要亮一点？”
“已经够亮了——就这个地方而言。”林德说。他的话讲抑扬有致，说得极快，但口气有点严厉。“整体照明保持如此是基于心理因素，太亮的话会在心中将光转换成热。要是我们把灯光调亮，即使将温度降低些，工人的抱怨也会升高。”
铎丝说：“这里似乎十分计算机化。我认为整个的运作都能交由计算机负责，这种环境是人工智能的天下。”
“完全正确，”林德说，“可是我们不敢冒这个险。如果有任何事情不对劲，我们需要随时有人在场。一台故障计算机引起的问题，可以影响到两千公里之外。”
“人为错误也一样糟，难道不是这样吗？”尉顿说。
“昵，是的，不过既然人类和计算机一块工作，计算机错误可以较快找出原因，再由人工进行矫正；反之借着计算机，人为错误也能较快修正回来。这就等于说，除非同时出现人为错误和计算机错误，否则不会发生任何严重问题，事实上，这种情况几乎从未发生过。”
“几乎从未发生过，但并非从来没有过，是吗？”谢顿说。
“几乎没有，但并非从来没有。计算机今非昔比，而人也一样。”
“世事似乎总是如此。”谢顿说完，轻轻笑了一声。
“噢，不，我没有怀旧的意思，我不是在说过去的美好时光，我指的是统计数据。”
听到这里，谢顿再度想起夫铭所说的有关时代正在衰退的那番话。
“懂我的意思了吧？”林德的音量逐渐降低，“那边有一-群人，从他们的样子看来是 C三层的。他们正在喝饮料，没一个在工作岗位上。”
“他们在喝什么？”铎丝问道。
“补充电解质流失的特殊饮料，果汁。”
“那你就不能怪他们，”铎丝愤愤地说道，“在这种又干又热的环境中，人们当然得喝点东西。”
“你知道一个熟练的 C三工人，借口喝罐饮料可以磨多少时间？而且，我们根本一点办法也没有。如果只给他们五分钟时间喝水，并且将每个工人的休息时间错开，好让他们不会全部聚成一群，就等于挑起一场叛变。”
现在他们正朝那群人走去。这些工人有男有女（达尔似乎多少是个两性平等社会），不论男女都未穿短衫。女性上身穿戴着一种装置，勉强可称为胸罩，但纯粹是功能性的。它的功用是撑起乳房，以增进通风效果，并降低排汗量，可是什么也遮不住。
铎丝凑近谢顿说：“这样穿有道理，哈里，我那里已经湿透了。”
“那就脱下你的胸罩，”谢顿说，“我不会举一根手指阻止你。”
“不知怎么回事，”铎丝说．“我就猜到你不会。”她还是让胸罩留在原处。
他们渐渐接近那群人——总共有十一二个。
铎丝说：“如果他们之中有人冒出粗言粗语，我会挺得住。”
“谢谢你，”林德说，“我不能保证他们不会——但我必须介绍你们。如果他们误以为你们两人是督察员，而且是在我的陪同之下，他们会变得无法无天。督察员应该自已独立四处探访，不能有任何管理部门的人在旁监督。”
他举起双臂：“热闾工们，我为你们介绍两个人。他们是来自外界的访客——两位外星人士，两位学者。他们的世界能源日渐短缺，他们来到这里，想要看看我们达尔是怎么做的。他们认为也许能学到些什么。”
“他们会学到如何流汗。”一名热闾工喊道，接着响起一阵刺耳的笑声。
“那女的现在已经满胸是汗，”一名女广吼道，“那样子遮掩起来。”
铎丝吼了回去：“我想把它脱下，但我的胸部没法跟你比。”笑声随即转趋友善。
不料一名年轻男工向前走来，一双深陷的眼睛紧紧盯着谢顿，他的脸孔则变作毫无表情的面具。他说：“我认识你，你是那个数学家。”
他冲过来，以急切而严肃的态度审视着谢顿的而孔。铎丝自然而然站到谢顿前面，林德则站到她的身前，并且吼道：“退下去，热闾工，注意你的礼貌。”
谢顿说：“慢着！让他和我讲话。为什么每个人都排在我面前？”
林德压低声音说：“如果他们任何一个走近，你会发觉他们的味道可不像温室的花朵。”
“我受得了，”谢顿直率地说，“年轻人，你想要做什么？”
“我名叫阿马瑞尔。雨果•阿马瑞尔。我曾在全息电视上看过你。”
“你或许看过，可是又怎么样？”
“我不记得你的名字。”
“你不必记得。”
“你提到一种叫心理史学的东西。”
“你不知道我多希望从未提过。”
“什么？”
“没什么，你到底要做什么？”
“我想跟你谈谈。只要一下子，就是现在。”
谢顿望向林德，后者坚决地摇了摇头：“在他值班时绝对不行。”
“你的班从什么时候开始，阿马瑞尔先生？”谢顿问道。
“一六○○时。”
“你能在明天一四○○时来见我吗？”
“当然可以，哪里？”
谢顿转头望向堤沙佛：“你能准我在你那里见他吗？”
堤沙佛看来非常不高兴：“没这个必要，他只是个热闾工。”
谢顿说：“他认出我的长相，他知道我的一些事。他不可能只是个普通人，我要在我的房间见他。”
然后，由于堤沙佛的脸孔并未软化，他又补充道：“在我的房间，房租迟早会付给你。而你当时正在上班，不在那栋公寓里。”
堤沙佛低声说道：“不是我，谢顿老爷。是我的妻子，卡西莉娅，她不会接受这种事。”
“我会跟她谈，”谢顿绷着脸说道，“她一定得接受。”
Chapter 64

Casilia Tisalver opened her eyes wide. "A heatsinker? Not in my apartment."
"Why not? Besides, hell be coming to my room," said Seldon. "At fourteen hundred."
"I wont have it," said Mistress Tisalver. "This is what comes of going down to the heatsinks. Jirad was a fool."
"Not at all, Mistress Tisalver. We went at my request and I was fascinated. I must see this young man, since that is necessary to my scholarly work."
"Im sorry if it is, but I wont have it."
Dors Venabili raised her hand. "Hari, let me take care of this. Mistress Tisalver, if Dr. Seldon must see someone in his room this afternoon, the additional person naturally means additional rent. We understand that. For today, then, the rent on Dr. Seldons room will be doubled."
Mistress Tisalver thought about it. "Well, thats decent of you, but its not only the credits. Theres the neighbors to think of. A sweaty, smelly heatsinker--"
"I doubt that hell be sweaty and smelly at fourteen hundred, Mistress Tisalver, but let me go on. Since Dr. Seldon must see him, then if he cant see him here, hell have to see him elsewhere, but we cant run here and there. That would be too inconvenient. Therefore, what we will have to do is to get a room elsewhere. It wont be easy and we dont want to do it, but we will have to. So we will pay the rent through today and leave and of course we will have to explain to Master Hummin why we have had to change the arrangements that he so kindly made for us."
"Wait." Mistress Tisalvers face became a study of calculation. "We wouldnt like to disoblige Master Hummin ... or you two. How long would this creature have to stay?"
"Hes coming at fourteen hundred. He must be at work at sixteen hundred. He will be here for less than two hours, perhaps considerably less. We will meet him outside, the two of us, and bring him to Dr. Seldons room. Any neighbors who see us will think he is an Outworlder friend of ours."
Mistress Tisalver nodded her head. "Then let it be as you say. Double rent for Master Seldons room for today and the heatsinker will visit just this one time."
"Just this one time," said Dors.
But later, when Seldon and Dors were sitting in her room, Dors said, "Why do you have to see him, Hari? Is interviewing a heatsinker important to psychohistory too?"
Seldon thought he detected a small edge of sarcasm in her voice and he said tartly, "I dont have to base everything on this huge project of mine, in which I have very little faith anyway. I am also a human being with human curiosities. We were down in the heatsinks for hours and you saw what the working people there were like. They were obviously uneducated. They were low-level individuals--no play on words intended--and yet here was one who recognized me. He must have seen me on holovision on the occasion of the Decennial Convention and he remembered the word psychohistory. He strikes me as unusual--as out of place somehow--and I would like to talk to him."
"Because it pleases your vanity to have become known even to heatsinkers in Dahl?"
"Well ... perhaps. But it also piques my curiosity."
"And how do you know he hasnt been briefed and intends to lead you into trouble as has happened before."
Seldon winced. "I wont let him run his fingers through my hair. In any case, were more nearly prepared now, arent we? And Im sure youll be with me. I mean, you let me go Upperside alone, you let me go with Raindrop Forty-Three to the microfarms alone, and youre not going to do that again, are you?"
"You can be absolutely sure I wont," said Dors.
"Well then, Ill talk to the young man and you can watch out for traps. I have every faith in you."
第六十四章
　　卡西莉娅•堤沙佛睁大了眼睛：“一个热闾工？不准进我的公寓。”
“为什么不准？何况，他会直接进我的房间。”谢顿说，“在一四○○时。”
“我就是不要，”堤沙佛夫人说，“这就是去热闾招惹的麻烦，吉拉德是个笨蛋。”
“根本不是，堤沙佛夫人。我们是在我的要求下前去的，而且我叹为观止。我必须见这个年轻人，那对我的学术工作很有必要。”
“如果这样的话，我感到很抱歉，但我就是不要。”
铎丝•凡纳比里举起一只手：“哈里，让我来处理吧。堤沙佛夫人，如果谢顿博士今天下午必须在他的房里见一个人，多一个人自然代表得多付房租，这点我们了解。所以说，谢顿博士今天的房租将会加倍。”
堤沙佛夫人想了一想：“嗯，你们真是宽宏大量，但这不只是信用点的问题，我还得考虑邻居怎么想。一个满身是汗、臭气冲天的热闾工……”
“我不信他在一四○○时会满身是汗、臭气冲天，堤沙佛夫人，但请让我继续说下去。既然谢顿博土非见他不可，那么假使不能在这里见他，他们必须找别的地方会面。可是我们不能跑来跑去，那样实在太不方便。因此，我们必须做的是在别处找个房间。这不会是件容易的事，我们也不想那样做，可是我们别无选择。所以我们会将房租付到今天，然后离开这里。当然啦，我们必须向夫铭老爷解释，他好心好意帮我们做的安排，我们为何不得不临时更改。”
“等一下，”堤沙佛夫人的脸变作精打细算的模样，“我们不希望得罪夫铭老爷——或是你们两位。那东西得待多久？”
“他会在一四○○时来到，而他必须在一六○○时上工。他在这里待不到两小时，也许还短得多。我们会在外面迎接他，我们两个一起，然后把他带到谢顿博士的房间。任何邻居要是看到我们，都会认为他是我们的外星世界朋友。”
堤沙佛夫人点了点头：“那就照你说的办吧。今天谢顿老爷的房租加倍。那热闾工只准来这么一次。”
“下不为例。”铎丝说。
但是一会儿之后，当谢顿与铎丝坐在她的房间时，铎丝却问道：“你为什么必须见他，哈里？会晤一个热闾工对心理史学有那么重要吗？”
谢顿认为她话语里带着一丝讥讽，他以锋利的口吻说：“我不必每件事都打着我这个伟大计划的招牌，反正我对它没什么信心。我是个有血有肉的人．具有人类的好奇心。我们下到热闾待了几个小时，你自己看到那些工人是什么样子。他们显然没受过教育，他们是低级的群众——我不打算玩文字游戏，然而这个人却认出我来。他一定是我在出席十年会议时，从全息电视上看到我的，而且他还记得心理史学这个名称。他令我感到很不寻常，总之是很不相称，我希望能跟他聊一聊。”
“因为连达尔的热间工都认识你，满足了你的虚荣心？”
“这……或许吧。但它同样引起了我的好奇心。”
“你怎么知道他不是奉命而来，打算引你步入陷阱，像前两次那样。”
谢顿怔了一怔：“我不会让他碰到我的半根头发。无论如何，我们这回几乎有了万全准备，对不对？而且我能确定，这次你会待在我身边。我的意思是说，你让我单独到穹顶上去，又让我单独和雨点四三到微生农场，但你再也不会这样做了，是吗？”
“你可以绝对肯定我再也不会。”铎丝说。
“好吧，那么让我和这个年轻人谈谈，由你负责注意可疑的陷阱。我对你有百分之百的信心。”
Chapter 65

Amaryl arrived a few minutes before 1400, looking warily about. His hair was neat and his thick mustache was combed and turned up slightly at the edges. His T-shirt was startlingly white. He did smell, but it was a fruity odor that undoubtedly came from the slightly overenthusiastic use of scent. He had a bag with him.
Seldon, who had been waiting outside for him, seized one elbow lightly, while Dors seized the other, and they moved rapidly into the elevator. Having reached the correct level, they passed through the apartment into Seldons room. Amaryl said in a low hangdog voice, "Nobody home, huh?"
"Everyones busy," said Seldon neutrally. He indicated the only chair in the room, a pad directly on the floor.
"No," said Amaryl. "I dont need that. One of you two use it." He squatted on the floor with a graceful downward motion.
Dors imitated the movement, sitting on the edge of Seldons floor-based mattress, but Seldon dropped down rather clumsily, having to make use of his hands and unable, quite, to find a comfortable position for his legs. Seldon said, "Well, young man, why do you want to see me?"
"Because youre a mathematician. Youre the first mathematician I ever saw--close up--so I could touch him, you know."
"Mathematicians feel like anyone else."
"Not to me, Dr. ...         Seldon?"
"Thats my name."
Amaryl looked pleased. "I finally remembered.--You see, I want to be a mathematician too."
"Very good. Whats stopping you?"
Amaryl suddenly frowned. "Are you serious?"
"I presume something is stopping you. Yes, Im serious."
"Whats stopping me is Im a Dahlite, a heatsinker on Dahl. I dont have the money to get an education and I cant get the credits to get an education. A real education, I mean. All they taught me was to read and cipher and use a computer and then I knew enough to be a heatsinker. But I wanted more  So I taught myself."
"In some ways, thats the best kind of teaching. How did you do that?"
"I knew a librarian  She was willing to help me  She was a very nice woman and she showed me how to use computers for learning mathematics. And she set up a software system that would connect me with other libraries. Id come on my days off and on mornings after my shift  Sometimes shed lock me in her private room so I wouldnt be bothered by people coming in or she would let me in when the library was closed. She didnt know mathematics herself, but she helped me all she could  She was oldish, a widow lady. Maybe she thought of me as a kind of son or something. She didnt have children of her own."
(Maybe, thought Seldon briefly, there was some other emotion involved too, but he put the thought away. None of his business.)
"I liked number theory," said Amaryl. "I worked some things out from what I learned from the computer and from the book-films it used to teach me mathematics. I came up with some new things that werent in the book-films." Seldon raised his eyebrows. "Thats interesting. Like what?"
"Ive brought some of them to you. Ive never showed them to anyone. The people around me--" He shrugged. "Theyd either laugh or be annoyed. Once I tried to tell a girl I knew, but she just said I was weird and wouldnt see me anymore  Is it all right for me to show them to you?"
"Quite all right. Believe me "
Seldon held out his hand aaaaafter a brief hesitation, Amaryl handed him the bag he was carrying.
For a long time, Seldon looked over Amaryls papers. The work was naive in the extreme, but he allowed no smile to cross his face  He followed the demonstrations, not one of which was new, of course--or even nearly new--or of any importance.
But that didnt matter.
Seldon looked up. "Did you do all of this yourself?"
Amaryl, looking more than half-frightened, nodded his head. Seldon extracted several sheets. "What made you think of this?" His finger ran down a line of mathematical reasoning.
Amaryl looked it over, frowned, and thought about it  Then he explained his line of thinking.
Seldon listened and said, "Did you ever read a book by Anat Bigell?"
"On number theory?"
"The title was Mathematical Deduction. It wasnt about number theory, particularly."
Amaryl shook his head. "I never heard of him. Im sorry."
"He worked out this theorem of yours three hundred years ago.
Amaryl looked stricken. "I didnt know that."
"Im sure you didnt. You did it more cleverly, though. Its not rigorous, but--"
"What do you mean, rigorous?"
"It doesnt matter." Seldon put the papers back together in a sheaf, restored it to the bag, and said, "Make several copies of all this. Take one copy, have it dated by an official computer, and place it under computerized seal. My friend here, Mistress Venabili, can get you into Streeling University without tuition on some sort of scholarship. Youll have to start at the beginning and take courses in other subjects than mathematics, but--"
By now Amaryl had caught his breath. "Into Streeling University? They wont take me "
"Why not? Dors, you can arrange it, cant you?"
"Im sure I can."
"No, you cant," said Amaryl hotly. "They wont take me  Im from Dahl "
"Well?"
"They wont take people from Dahl "
Seldon looked at Dors. "Whats he talking about?"
Dors shook her head. "I really dont know."
Amaryl said, "Youre an Outworlder, Mistress  How long have you been at Streeling?"
"A little over two years, Mr. Amaryl."
"Have you ever seen Dahlites there--short, curly black hair, big mustaches?"
"There are students with all kinds of appearances."
"But no Dahlites. Look again the next time youre there."
"Why not?" said Seldon.
"They dont like us. We look different. They dont like our mustaches."
"You can shave your--" but Seldons voice died under the others furious glance.
"Never. Why should I? My mustache is my manhood."
"You shave your beard. Thats your manhood too."
"To my people it is the mustache."
Seldon looked at Dors again and murmured, "Bald heads, mustaches ... madness."
"What?" said Amaryl angrily.
"Nothing. Tell me what else they dont like about Dahlites."
"They make up things not to like. They say we smell. They say were dirty. They say we steal. They say were violent. They say were dumb."
"Why do they say all this?"
"Because its easy to say it and it makes them feel good. Sure, if we work in the heatsinks, we get dirty and smelly. If were poor and held down, some of us steal and get violent. But that isnt the way it is with all of us. How about those tall yellow-hairs in the Imperial Sector who think they own the Galaxy--no, they do own the Galaxy. Dont they ever get violent? Dont they steal sometimes? If they did my job, theyd smell the way I do. If they had to live the way I have to, theyd get dirty too."
"Who denies that there are people of all kinds in all places?" said Seldon.
"No one argues the matter! They just take it for granted. Master Seldon, Ive got to get away from Trantor. I have no chance on Trantor, no way of earning credits, no way of getting an education, no way of becoming a mathematician, no way of becoming any thing but what they say I am ... a worthless nothing." This last was said in frustration--and desperation.
Seldon tried to be reasonable. "The person Im renting this room from is a Dahlite. He has a clean job. Hes educated."
"Oh sure," said Amaryl passionately. "There are some. They let a few do it so that they can say it can be done. And those few can live nicely as long as they stay in Dahl. Let them go outside and theyll see how theyre treated. And while theyre in here they make themselves feel good by treating the rest of us like dirt. That makes them yellow-hairs in their own eyes. What did this nice person youre renting this room from say when you told him you were bringing in a heatsinker? What did he say I would be like? Theyre gone now ... wouldnt be in the same place with me."
Seldon moistened his lips. "I wont forget you. Ill see to it that youll get off Trantor and into my own University in Helicon--once Im back there myself."
"Do you promise that? Your word of honor? Even though Im a Dahlite?"
"The fact that youre a Dahlite is unimportant to me. The fact that you are already a mathematician is! But I still cant quite grasp what youre telling me. I find it impossible to believe that there would be such unreasoning feeling against harmless people."
Amaryl said bitterly, "Thats because youve never had any occasion to interest yourself in such things. It can all pass right under your nose and you wouldnt smell a thing because it doesnt affect you. " Dors said, "Mr. Amaryl, Dr. Seldon is a mathematician like you and his head can sometimes be in the clouds. You must understand that. I am a historian, however. I know that it isnt unusual to have one group of people look down upon another group. There are peculiar and almost ritualistic hatreds that have no rational justification and that can have their serious historical influence. Its too bad."
Amaryl said, "Saying something is too bad is easy. You say you disapprove, which makes you a nice person, and then you can go about your own business and not be interested anymore. Its a lot worse than too bad. Its against everything decent and natural. Were all of us the same, yellow-hairs and black-hairs, tall and short, Easterners, Westerners, Southerners, and Outworlders. Were all of us, you and I and even the Emperor, descended from the people of Earth, arent we?"
"Descended from what?" asked Seldon. He turned to look at Dors, his eyes wide.
"From the people of Earth!" shouted Amaryl. "The one planet on which human beings originated."
"One planet? Just one planet?"
"The only planet. Sure. Earth."
"When you say Earth, you mean Aurora, dont you?"
"Aurora? Whats that?--I mean Earth. Have you never heard of Earth?"
"No," said Seldon. "Actually not."
"Its a mythical world," began Dors, "that--"
"Its not mythical. It was a real planet."
Seldon sighed. "Ive heard this all before. Well, lets go through it again. Is there a Dahlite book that tells of Earth?"
"What?"
"Some computer software, then?"
"I dont know what youre talking about."
"Young man, where did you hear about Earth?"
"My dad told me. Everyone knows about it."
"Is there anyone who knows about it especially? Did they teach you about it in school?"
"They never said a word about it there."
"Then how do people know about it?"
Amaryl shrugged his shoulders with an air of being uselessly badgered over nothing. "Everyone just does. If you want stories about it, theres Mother Rittah. I havent heard that shes died yet."
"Your mother? Wouldnt you know--"
"Shes not my mother. Thats just what they call her. Mother Rittah. Shes an old woman. She lives in Billibotton. Or used to."
"Wheres that?"
"Down in that direction," said Amaryl, gesturing vaguely.
"How do I get there?"
"Get there? You dont want to get there. Youd never come back."
"Why not?"
"Believe me. You dont want to go there."
"But Id like to see Mother Rittah."
Amaryl shook his head. "Can you use a knife?"
"For what purpose? What kind of knife?"
"A cutting knife. Like this." Amaryl reached down to the belt that held his pants tight about his waist. A section of it came away and from one end there flashed out a knife blade, thin, gleaming, and deadly. Dorss hand immediately came down hard upon his right wrist. Amaryl laughed. "I wasnt planning to use it. I was just showing it to you." He put the knife back in his belt. "You need one in self-defense and if you dont have one or if you have one but dont know how to use it, youll never get out of Billibotton alive. Anyway"--he suddenly grew very grave and intent--"are you really serious, Master Seldon, about helping me get to Helicon?"
"Entirely serious. Thats a promise. Write down your name and where you can be reached by hypercomputer. You have a code, I suppose."
"My shift in the heatsinks has one. Will that do?"
"Yes."
"Well then," said Amaryl, looking up earnestly at Seldon, "this means I have my whole future riding on you, Master Seldon, so please dont go to Billibotton. I cant afford to lose you now."
He turned beseeching eyes on Dors and said softly, "Mistress Venabili, if hell listen to you, dont let him go. Please."
Billibotton
DAHL-- ... Oddly enough, the best-known aspect of this sector is Billibotton, a semi-legendary place about which innumerable tales have grown up. In fact, a whole branch of literature now exists in which heroes and adventurers (and victims) must dare the dangers of passing through Billibotton. So stylized have these stories become that the one well-known and, presumably, authentic tale involving such a passage, that of Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili, has come to seem fantastic simply by association ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

第六十五章
　　阿马瑞尔于一四○○时之前几分钟抵达，一面走一面谨慎地环顾四周。他的头发相当整洁，浓密的八字胡经过梳理，两端微微向上翘起，身上的短衫白得惊人。他的确有一股味道，不过那是一种水果香味，无疑是由于香水用得有点过度。此外，他随身带了一个袋子。
谢顿早就等在外面。他和铎丝分别拉着阿乌瑞尔的手臂，三人迅速走向升降机。到了正确的楼层之后，他们穿过公寓中其他房间，直奔谢顿的卧房。
阿马瑞尔卑躬地低声说道：“没有人在家，啊？”
“每个人都在忙。”谢顿中肯地说。然后他指了指房间中唯一的椅子，那其实是个直接放在地板上的坐垫。
“不，”阿马瑞尔说，“我不需要那个，你们两人随便哪位用吧。”他以优雅的动作蹲坐到地板上。
铎丝模仿着那个动作，坐到谢顿那个坐垫的旁边。谢顿坐下的姿势十分笨拙，不得不伸手帮忙，而且双腿怎么搁都不对劲。
谢顿说：“好啦，年轻人，你为什么想要见我？”
“因为你是一位数学家，是我见过的第一位数学家——近距离，我甚至能碰到你，你知道我的意思。”
“数学家摸起来跟其他人一样。”
“对我而言可不一样，谢……谢……谢顿博士？”
“那正是我的名字。”
阿马瑞尔看来很高兴：“我终于想起来了。你可知道，谢顿博士，我也想成为一位数学家。”
“很好。是什么阻止了你？”
阿马瑞尔突然皱起眉头：“你真的想知道吗？”
“是的，我很想知道。我猜想一定有什么阻止了你。”
“阻止我的就是我是个达尔人，是个达尔的热闾工。我没钱接受教育，也赚不到足够的信用点受教育——我是指真正的教育。他们教我的只不过是阅读、计算，以及怎样使用计算机，然后我就足以当个热闾工。但是我要学更多的东西，所以我一直在自修。”
“就某方面而言，那是最好的教育方式。你是怎么做的？”
“我认识一名图书馆员，她乐意帮我。她是一位非常好的妇人，教导我如何使用计算机学习数学。她还建了一个软件系统，让我能和其他图书馆联线。我总是在假日以及早晨下工后到那儿去。有时她会把我锁在她私人的房间，这样我就不会被其他人打扰，她也会在图书馆关闭时让我进来。她自己完全不懂数学，但她尽一切力量帮助我。她有些年纪了，是个寡妇。也许她把我当成儿子之类看待，她自己没有子女。”
（也许，谢顿突然想到，这里面还牵涉到其他情感。但他随即将这个想法抛到脑后，这与他毫无关系。）
“我喜欢数论，”阿马瑞尔说，“我根据自己从计算机，以及它用来教我数学的胶卷书中学到的东西，自己做出一些结果。我得到一些新的东西，是那些胶卷书里没有的。”
谢顿扬起眉毛：“那可真有意思，比如说什么？”
“我带来一些，我从未给任何人看过。我周围那些人……”他耸了耸肩，“他们不是大笑就是嫌烦。有一次，我试着告诉一个女孩我知道的东西，但她只是说我莫名其妙，以后再也不要见我。我拿给你看没关系吗？”
“真的没关系，相信我。”
谢顿伸出一只手。短暂的迟疑之后，阿马瑞尔将带来的袋子交给了他。
接下来好长一段时间，谢顿都在翻阅阿马瑞尔的稿件。其中的内容都极其朴素，但他不让脸上掠现任何笑容。他一个一个论证读下去，当然，并没有任何创见，甚至连接近创见的也没有，更找不到任何重要结果。
不过这没有关系。
谢顿抬起头：“这些全是你自己做出来的吗？”
阿马瑞尔看来有七八分吓呆了，只是一个劲地点头。
谢顿抽出几张纸来：“你怎么会想到这点？”他的手指画向一行数学推论。
阿马瑞尔仔细看了看，皱起眉头来，又想了一想。然后，他开始解释自己的思路。
谢顿听完之后说：“你曾经读过艾南•比格尔写的一本书吗？”
“有关数沦的吗？”
“书名叫做《数学演绎法》，不是专讲数论的。”
阿码瑞尔摇了摇头：“我从来没听过这个人，我很抱歉。”
“三百年以前，他就推出了你这个定理。”
阿马瑞尔似乎受到当头棒喝：“我不知道这件事。”
“我相信你不知道，不过你的做法比较高明。虽然并不严密，可是……”
“你所谓‘严密’是什么意思？”
“这没有关系。”谢顿将稿件重新扎成一束，放回那个袋子里。“把这些全部复印几份，找个官方计算机将其中一份打上日期，并且加上计算机化封印。我的这位朋友，凡纳比里夫人，能帮你申请到某种奖学金，让你免费进入川陀大学就读。你必须一切从头开始，还要修习数学以外的其他课程，但是……”
不料阿马瑞尔突然倒抽一口气：“进川陀大学？他们不会收我。”
“为什么不会？铎丝，你能帮他安排，对不对？”
“我确定可以。”
“不，你办不到。”阿马瑞尔激动地说，“他们不会收我，我是个达尔人。”
“那又怎么样？”
“他们不会收达尔的同胞。”
谢顿望向铎丝：“他在说些什么？”
铎丝摇了摇头：“我真的不知道。”
阿马瑞尔说：“你是一位外星人士，夫人？你在川陀大学待了多久了？”
“两年多一点．阿马瑞尔先生。”
“你曾经在那里见到过达尔人吗——矮个子、黑色卷发、粗大的八字胡？”
“那里各式各样外形的学生都有。”
“可是没有达尔人，你下次再仃细看一看。”
“为什么没有？”谢顿问道。
“他们不喜欢我们，我们看来不一样，他们不喜欢我们的八字胡。”
“你可以剃掉你的……”在对方激愤的瞪视下，谢顿的声音陡然中断。
“绝不，我为什么要那样做？八字胡是我的男性象征。”
“你剃掉了下面的胡须，那也是你的男性象征。”
“对我的同胞而言八字胡才是。”
谢顿再度望向铎丝，喃喃说道：“光头，八字胡……愚昧……”
“什么？”阿马瑞尔气呼呼地说。
“没什么。告诉我，达尔人还有哪些地方是他们不喜欢的。”
“他们捏造出许多不喜欢的事。他们说我们有臭味，他们说我们肮脏，他们说我们偷窃，他们说我们暴戾，说我们愚蠢。”
“他们为何要这样说？”
“因为说说很容易，而且会让他们感到舒服。如果我们存热闾里工作，我们当然会变脏变臭。如果我们贫穷又不得翻身，有些人就会行窃，并且染上暴戾之气，不过我们大家并非都是那样。那些居住在皇区，认为他们拥有整个银河——不，的确拥有整个银河的黄发高个子又怎么样？他们绝不会有暴戾之气吗？他们从来不偷窃吗？如果让他们做我的工作，他们会和我一样发出臭味；如果他们必须过着像我一样的生活，他们也会变得肮脏。”
“谁能否认各处住有各种不同的人？”谢顿说。
“没人议论这一点！他们只是视为理所当然。谢顿老爷，我一定得离开川陀。我在川陀没有任何机会，无法嫌到信用点，无法接受教育，无法成为一位数学家，无法成为任何人物，只能是他们所谓的……一个没用的废物。”最后半句是在挫折与绝望中说出来的。
谢顿试图跟他说理：“租给我这个房间的就是个达尔人，他有个干净的工作，而且受过教育。”
“噢，当然啦。”阿马瑞尔以情绪化的口吻说，“是有些这种人。他们让少数人那样，这样他们就能说那是办得到的。那些少数人只要不出达尔，他们就能活得很好。要是让他们到外面去，他们就会晓得将受到何等待遇。当他们待在这里的时候，他们把我们其他人视同粪土，这样他们就会觉得舒服。因此在他们自己眼中，他们就成了黄发阶级。租给你这个房间的好好先生，当你告诉他你要带一个热闾工进来时，他究竟说了些什么？他说我像个什么？他们现在都走了……不愿意和我待在同一个地方。”
谢顿舔了舔嘴唇：“我不会忘记你。我保证会让你离开川陀，进入赫利肯我的那所大学——一旦我自己回到那里之后。”
“你答应这件事吗？你以名誉担保？虽然我是个达尔人？”
“你是达尔人的事实对我并不重要，重要的是你已经是一位数学家！但是你告诉我的这些事情，我仍然无法完全理解。对于无害的族群竞有如此非理性的情绪，我觉得实在难以置信。”
阿马瑞尔以挖苦的口气说：“那是因为你从来没有任何机会，让自己对这种事发生兴趣。它可以从你的鼻端大摇大摆通过，你却什么也闻不到，因为它对你毫无影响。”
铎丝说：“阿马瑞尔先生，谢顿博士和你一样是数学家，他的脑袋有时会在九霄云外，你必须了解这点。然而，我是一位历史学家。一群人瞧不起另一群人，我知道它并非不寻常的事。有些特殊的、几乎是仪式化的仇恨，根本没有任何理性依据，而且会产生严重的历史影响。这实在太糟了。”
阿马瑞尔说：“‘太糟了’这句话嘴巴说说倒很容易。你说你不敢苟同，这样你就能成为一个好人，然后你就可以管你自己的事，再也不用关心这个问题。这要比‘太糟了’还要糟许多倍，它抵触了所有高尚、自然的事物。我们大家都一样，不论是黄发或黑发，高或矮，东方人、西方人、南方人或外星人士。我们都是一家人，你、我，甚至皇上，全部是地球人的后裔，不是吗？”
“什么的后裔？”谢顿问道。他转身望向铎丝，眼睛睁得老大。
“地球人的后裔！”阿马瑞尔喊道，“人类发源的那颗行星。”
“一颗行星？只有一颗行星？”
“唯一的行星，这还用说，就是地球。”
“你所谓的地球，指的是奥罗拉，对不对？”
“奥罗拉？那是什么？我指的就是地球。你从来没听说过地球吗？”
谢顿说：“其实不能算有。”
“它是个神话世界……”铎丝说到一半便被打断。
“那不是神活，它是一颗真实的行星。”
谢顿叹了一口气：“我以前也听过这一套。好吧，让我们从头再来一遍。达尔是不是有一本书，里面提到了地球？”
“什么？”
“那么，某种计算机软件？”
“我不知道你到底任说些什么。”
“年轻人，你是从哪里听说地球的？”
“我爸爸告诉我的，每个人都知道它。”
“有没有什么人对它特别了解？他们在学校里教过你这些吗？”
“那里根本不提这种事。”
“那么人们是怎么知道的？”
阿马瑞尔耸了耸肩，仿佛听列一个无中生有的烦人问题。“就是每个人都知道。如果你想听这方面的故事，可以去找瑞塔嬷嬷，我还没听说她去世了。”
“你妈妈？你怎么会不知道……”
“她不是我妈妈，只是他们都这样叫她，瑞塔嬷嬷。她是个老妇人，住在脐眼，至少以前住在那里。’’“那地方在哪里？”
“朝那个方向一直走。”阿马瑞尔一面说，一面做了一个含糊的手势。
“我如何到那里去？”
“到那里去？你不该想到那里去，否则你将有去无回。”
“为什么？”
“相信我，你不该想到那里去。”
“可是我希望见见瑞塔嬷嬷。”
阿马瑞尔摇了摇头：“你会用刀吗？”
“做什么用途？什么样的刀？”
“切东西的刀，像这一把。”阿马瑞尔伸手向下，碰了碰紧紧系在腰际的皮带。皮带的一节随即脱落，其中一端闪出一把利刃，它又薄又亮，显然足以致命。
铎丝的于立刻抓住他的右腕。
阿马瑞尔笑了几声：“我不是打算用它，只是亮出来给你们看看。”他将刀子再插回皮带内，“你需要一把刀用来自卫，如果你没有，或者虽有却不知如何使用，你就再也无法活着离开脐眼。总之……”他忽然变得非常严肃专注．“你说要帮助我离开川陀，是认真的吗，谢顿老爷？”
“百分之百认真，那是我的承诺。写下你的名字。还有如何能用超波计算机联络到你。你有址码吧，我想。”
“在我热闾的岗位上有一个，可以吗？”
“可以。”
“好啦，”阿马瑞尔一面说，一面抬起头一本正经地望着谢顿，“这就代表我的未来全部寄托在你身上，谢顿老爷，所以拜托你别去脐眼。如果现在失去你，我无法承担这种损失。”他将恳求的目光转向铎丝，轻声说道：“凡纳比里夫人，如果他肯听你的，就不要让他去，拜托。”
Chapter 66

When Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili were alone, Dors asked thoughtfully, "Are you really planning to see this Mother woman?"
"Im thinking about it, Dors."
"Youre an odd one, Hari. You seem to go steadily from bad to worse. You went Upperside, which seemed harmless enough, for a rational purpose when you were in Streeling. Then, in Mycogen, you broke into the Elders aerie, a much more dangerous task, for a much more foolish purpose. And now in Dahl, you want to go to this place, which that young man seems to think is simple suicide, for something altogether nonsensical."
"Im curious about this reference to Earth--and must know if theres anything to it."
Dors said, "Its a legend and not even an interesting one. It is routine. The names differ from planet to planet, but the content is the same. There is always the tale of an original world and a golden age. There is a longing for a supposedly simple and virtuous past that is almost universal among the people of a complex and vicious society. In one way or another, this is true of all societies, since everyone imagines his or her own society to be too complex and vicious, however simple it may be. Mark that down for your psychohistory."
"Just the same," said Seldon, "I have to consider the possibility that one world did once exist. Aurora ... Earth ... the name doesnt matter. In fact--"
He paused and finally Dors said, "Well?"
Seldon shook his head. "Do you remember the hand-on-thigh story you told me in Mycogen? It was right after I got the Book from Raindrop Forty-Three ... Well, it popped into my head one evening recently when we were talking to the Tisalvers. I said something that reminded me, for an instant--"
"Reminded you of what?"
"I dont remember. It came into my head and went out again, but somehow every time I think of the single-world notion, it seems to me I have the tips of my fingers on something and then lose it."
Dors looked at Seldon in surprise. "I dont see what it could be. The hand-on-thigh story has nothing to do with Earth or Aurora."
"I know, but this ... thing ... that hovers just past the edge of my mind seems to be connected with this single world anyway and I have the feeling that I must find out more about it at any cost. That ... and robots."
"Robots too? I thought the Elders aerie put an end to that."
"Not at all. Ive been thinking about them." He stared at Dors with a troubled look on his face for a long moment, then said, "But Im not sure."
"Sure about what, Hari?"
But Seldon merely shook his head and said nothing more.
Dors frowned, then said, "Hari, let me tell you one thing. In sober history--and, believe me, I know what Im talking about there is no mention of one world of origin. Its a popular belief, I admit. I dont mean just among the unsophisticated followers of folklore, like the Mycogenians and the Dahlite heatsinkers, but there are biologists who insist that there must have been one world of origin for reasons that are well outside my area of expertise and there are the more mystical historians who tend to speculate about it. And among the leisure-class intellectuals, I understand such speculations are becoming fashionable. Still, scholarly history knows nothing about it."
Seldon said, "All the more reason, perhaps, to go beyond scholarly history. All I want is a device that will simplify psychohistory for me and I dont care what the device is, whether it is a mathematical trick or a historical trick or something totally imaginary. If the young man weve just talked to had had a little more formal training, Id have set him on the problem. His thinking is marked by considerable ingenuity and originality--"
Dors said, "And youre really going to help him, then?"
"Absolutely. Just as soon as Im in a position to."
"But ought you to make promises youre not sure youll be able to keep?"
"I want to keep it. If youre that stiff about impossible promises, consider that Hummin told Sunmaster Fourteen that Id use psychohistory to get the Mycogenians their world back. Theres just about zero chance of that. Even if I work out psychohistory, who knows if it can be used for so narrow and specialized a purpose? Theres a real case of promising what one cant deliver."
But Dors said with some heat, "Chetter Hummin was trying to save our lives, to keep us out of the hands of Demerzel and the Emperor. Dont forget that. And I think he really would like to help the Mycogenians."
"And I really would like to help Yugo Amaryl and I am far more likely to be able to help him than I am the Mycogenians, so if you justify the second, please dont criticize the first. Whats more, Dors"--and his eyes flashed angrily--"I really would like to find Mother Rittah and Im prepared to go alone.""Never!" snapped Dors. "If you go, I go."
第六十六章
第十四部 脐眼
达尔：……奇怪得很，本区最出名的一点竟是脐眼，一个半传奇性的地方，无数的传说都以它为中心。事实上，如今存在一个完整的文学派别。其中的主角与冒险家（或牺牲者）必须挑战穿越脐眼的危险。
这些故事已经变得太形式化。因此有一个流传甚广，而且想必真实的传说。是关于哈里•谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里的一次历险，仅仅由于背景为该地，因此看来近乎传奇……
——《银河百科全书》


第六十六章
当哈里•谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里再度独处时，铎丝语重心长地问道：“你真打算去见那个叫‘嬷嬷’的女人？”
“我是有这个打算。”
“你是个怪人，哈里，你似乎每况愈下。当初在斯璀璘，你为一个合理的目的到穹顶上去，那样做好像没什么害处。后来在麦曲生，你闯进长老阁，那是件危险许多的行动，为的却是个愚蠢许多的目的。而如今在达尔．你又想去那个地方，那年轻人似乎认为这样做无异自杀，而这回的目的根本毫无意义。”
“我对他提到的地球感到好奇。如果它有任何蹊跷，我一定要弄清楚。”
铎丝说：“它只是个传奇，甚至不算是有趣的一个。那只是老生常谈，每颗行星上的使用名称都不同，不过内容完全一样。有关起源世界和黄金时代的传说始终不曾消失；处于复杂而邪恶的社会中，人们几乎都渴望一个想必简单且良善的过去。就某个角度而言，所有的社会都是这样，因为每个人都习惯地把自己的社会想象得太复杂、太邪恶，而不管它实际上有多单纯。把这点记下来，放进你的心理史学中。”
“即使如此，”谢顿说，“我仍须考虑某个世界的确曾经存在的可能性。奥罗拉……地球……名称并不重要。其实……”
他顿了许久，最后铎丝终于不得不问：“怎么样？”
谢顿摇了摇头：“你记不记得在麦曲生的时候，你对我说的那个毛手毛脚的故事？当时我刚从雨点四三那里拿到那本典籍……嗯，前两天傍晚，当我们和堤沙佛一家聊天时，它又突然出现在我的脑海。有那么一瞬间，我说的什么事提醒了我自己……”
“提醒你什么？”
“我记不得，它钻进我的脑袋，马上又溜了出去。可是不知怎么搞的，每当我想到那个单一世界的观念，我就觉得好像摸到什么东西，然后又给它溜掉了。”
铎丝惊讶地望着谢顿：“我看不出那会是什么，毛手毛脚的故事和地球或奥罗拉并无任何关联。”
“我知道，可是这件……事情……这件在我心灵边缘徘徊的事情，似乎就是和这个单一世界有关。而且我有一种感觉，我必须不惜任何代价．找出更多和它有关的资料。这点……以及机器人。”
“还有机器人？我以为长老阁的事已经为它画上句点。”
“根本没有，我还一直想到它们。”他带着困惑的表情，凝视了铎丝许久，又说：“可是我并不确定。”
“确定什么，哈里？”
不过谢顿只是摇着头，没有再说什么。
铎丝皱了皱眉头，然后说：“哈里，让我告诉你一件事。在严肃的史学中——相信我，我知道自己在说什么——根本没提到过起源世界。它是一个广为流传的信仰，这点我承认。我指的不只是民间传说的天真信徒，例如麦曲生人和达尔的热闾工；有许多生物学家，也都坚称必定有个起源世界，根据的理由远远超出我的专业领域。此外还有些倾向神秘主义的历史学家，也喜欢对它做些臆测。而在有闲阶级的知识分子之间，我了解这种臆测已逐渐变成时尚。然而，学院派的史学对它仍旧一无所知。”
谢顿说：“既然这样，或许我们更有理由超越学院派史学。我要的只是个能为我简化心理史学的机制，我不在乎是什么机制，无论是数学技巧、历史技巧，或是什么全然虚无的东西都好。如果刚刚和我们晤谈的那个年轻人，曾多受过一点正规训练，我会把这个问题交给他。他的思考具有可观的巧思和原创性……”
铎丝说：“这么说，你真准备帮助他？”
“正是如此，一旦我有这个能力之后。”
“可是你该承诺吗？你根本不知道这事是否能兑现。”
“我是想兑现。如果你对不可能的承诺那么斤斤计较，想想夫铭是怎么对日主十四说的。他说我会用心理史学帮麦曲生人带回他们的世界，这件事成功的机会根本等于零。即使我真的完成心理史学，谁晓得能不能用在如此狭窄而特定的目的上？要说无法兑现的承诺，这是个现成的实例。”
不料铎丝带着一点火气说：“别忘了，哈里，契特•夫铭当时是试图救我们的命，让我们不至落入丹莫茨尔和皇上手中。而且我认为，他是真的希望帮助那些麦曲生人。”
“而我也真的希望帮助雨果•阿马瑞尔。比起那些麦曲生人，我能帮助他的可能性要大得多，所以如果你认可前者，就请不要再批评后者。除此之外，铎丝，”他的双眼闪出怒火，“我真的希望找到瑞塔嬷嬷，我准备独自前往。”
“绝不！”铎丝断然说道，“如果你去，那我也去。”
Chapter 67

Mistress Tisalver returned with her daughter in tow an hour after Amaryl had left on this way to his shift. She said nothing at all to either Seldon or Dors, but gave a curt nod of her head when they greeted her and gazed sharply about the room as though to verify that the heatsinker had left no trace. She then sniffed the air sharply and looked at Seldon accusingly before marching through the common room into the family bedroom.
Tisalver himself arrived home later and when Seldon and Dors came to the dinner table, Tisalver took advantage of the fact that his wife was still ordering some last-minute details in connection with the dinner to say in a low voice, "Has that person been here?"
"And gone," said Seldon solemnly. "Your wife was out at the time."
Tisalver nodded and said, "Will you have to do this again?"
"I dont think so," said Seldon.
"Good."
Dinner passed largely in silence, but afterward, when the daughter had gone to her room for the dubious pleasures of computer practice, Seldon leaned back and said, "Tell me about Billibotton."
Tisalver looked astonished and his mouth moved without any sound issuing.
Casilia, however, was less easily rendered speechless. She said, "Is that where your new friend lives? Are you going to return the visit?"
"So far," said Seldon quietly, "I have just asked about Billibotton."
Casilia said sharply, "It is a slum. The dregs live there. No one goes there, except the filth that make their homes there."
"I understand a Mother Rittah lives there."
"I never heard of her," said Casilia, her mouth closing with a snap. It was quite clear that she had no intention of knowing anyone by name who lived in Billibotton.
Tisalver, casting an uneasy look at his wife, said, "Ive heard of her. Shes a crazy old woman who is supposed to tell fortunes."
"And does she live in Billibotton?"
"I dont know, Master Seldon. Ive never seen her. Shes mentioned sometimes in the news holocasts when she makes her predictions."
"Do they come true?"
Tisalver snorted. "Do predictions ever come true? Hers dont even make sense."
"Does she ever talk about Earth?"
"I dont know. I wouldnt be surprised."
"The mention of Earth doesnt puzzle you. Do you know about Earth?"
Now Tisalver looked surprised. "Certainly, Master Seldon. Its the world all people came from ... supposedly."
"Supposedly? Dont you believe it?"
"Me? Im educated. But many ignorant people believe it."
"Are there book-films about Earth?"
"Childrens stories sometimes mention Earth. I remember, when I was a young boy, my favorite story began, Once, long ago, on Earth, when Earth was the only planet-- Remember, Casilia? You liked it too."
Casilia shrugged, unwilling to bend as yet.
"Id like to see it sometime," said Seldon, "but I mean real book-films ... uh ... learned ones ... or films ... or printouts."
"I never heard of any, but the library--"
"Ill try that.--Are there any taboos about speaking of Earth?"
"What are taboos?"
"I mean, is it a strong custom that people mustnt talk of Earth or that outsiders mustnt ask about it?"
Tisalver looked so honestly astonished that there seemed no point in waiting for an answer.
Dors put in, "Is there some rule about outsiders not going to Billibotton?"
Now Tisalver turned earnest. "No rule, but its not a good idea for anyone to go there. I wouldnt."
Dors said, "Why not?"
"Its dangerous. Violent! Everyone is armed.--I mean, Dahl is an armed place anyway, but in Billibotton they use the weapons. Stay in this neighborhood. Its safe."
"So far," said Casilia darkly. "It would be better if we left altogether. Heatsinkers go anywhere these days." And there was another lowering look in Seldons direction.
Seldon said, "What do you mean that Dahl is an armed place? There are strong Imperial regulations against weapons."
"I know that," said Tisalver, "and there are no stun guns here or percussives or Psychic Probes or anything like that. But there are knives." He looked embarrassed.
Dors said, "Do you carry a knife, Tisalver?"
"Me?" He looked genuinely horrified. "I am a man of peace and this is a safe neighborhood."
"We have a couple of them in the house," said Casilia, sniffing again. "Were not that certain this is a safe neighborhood."
"Does everyone carry knives?" asked Dors.
"Almost everyone, Mistress Venabili," said Tisalver. "Its customary. But that doesnt mean everyone uses them."
"But they use them in Billibotton, I suppose," said Dors.
"Sometimes. When theyre excited, they have fights."
"And the government permits it? The Imperial government, I mean?"
"Sometimes they try to clean Billibotton up, but knives are too easy to hide and the custom is too strong. Besides, its almost always Dahlites that get killed and I dont think the Imperial government gets too upset over that."
"What if its an outsider who gets killed?"
"If its reported, the Imperials could get excited. But what happens is that no one has seen anything and no one knows anything. The Imperials sometimes round up people on general principles, but they can never prove anything. I suppose they decide its the outsiders fault for being there.--So dont go to Billibotton, even if you have a knife."
Seldon shook his head rather pettishly. "I wouldnt carry a knife. I dont know how to use one. Not skillfully."
"Then its simple, Master Seldon. Stay out." Tisalver shook his head portentously. "Just stay out."
"I may not be able to do that either," said Seldon.
Dors glared at him, clearly annoyed, and said to Tisalver, "Where does one buy a knife? Or may we have one of yours?"
Casilia said quickly, "No one takes someone elses knife. You must buy your own."
Tisalver said, "There are knife stores all over. There arent supposed to be. Theoretically theyre illegal, you know. Any appliance store sells them, however. If you see a washing machine on display, thats a sure sign."
"And how does one get to Billibotton?" asked Seldon.
"By Expressway."
Tisalver looked dubious as he looked at Dorss frowning expression.
Seldon said, "And once I reach the Expressway?"
"Get on the eastbound side and watch for the signs. But if you must go, Master Seldon"--Tisalver hesitated, then said--"you mustnt take Mistress Venabili. Women sometimes are treated ... worse."
"She wont go," said Seldon.
"Im afraid she will," said Dors with quiet determination.

第六十七章
　　阿马瑞尔离开一小时之后，堤沙佛夫人牵着她的女儿一块回来。她没对谢顿或铎丝说半句话，只是在他们跟她打招呼时随便点了点头，并以锐利的目光扫视整个房间，仿佛要确定那热闾工未曾留下任何痕迹。接着她猛力吸了几口气，又以必师问罪的眼光望向谢顿，这于穿过起居室走到主卧房。
堤沙佛自己较晚回家。当谢顿与铎丝来到餐桌旁，堤沙佛趁着妻子还在张罗晚餐最后的细节，压低声音说：“那人来过了吗？”
“来过又走了，”谢顿严肃地说，“你太太当时也不在。”
堤沙佛点了点头，又说：“你还需要请他来吗？”
“我想不会了。”谢顿答道。
“很好。”
晚餐几乎在沉默中进行。但在晚餐过后，当小女孩回到她的房间去练习趣味性可疑的计算机时，谢顿将身子往后一靠，说：“告诉我有关脐眼的种种。”
堤沙佛看来吃了一惊，蠕动的嘴唇并未发出任何声音。然而，卡西莉娅却没那么容易目瞪口呆。
她说：“你的新朋友住在那里吗？你准备要去回拜？”
“目前为止，”谢顿平静地说，“我只是提到脐眼而已。”
卡西莉娅尖声说道：“它是个贫民窟，住在那里的都是渣滓。没有人到那里去，只有秽物才把那里当自己的家。”
“我知道有位瑞塔嬷嬷住在那儿。”
“我从没听说过这个人。”卡西莉娅说完猛地闭上嘴巴。她的意思相当明显，她根本不打算知道任何住在脐眼的人叫什么名字。
堤沙佛一面不安地望着他的妻子，一面说道：“我曾听说过她，她是个疯癫的老妇人，据说靠算命为生。”
“她住在脐眼吗？”
“我不知道，谢顿老爷，我从未见过她。她偶尔做出预言的时候，全息电视新闻便会提到。”
“它们成真了吗？”
堤沙佛嗤之以鼻：“哪个预言最后成真了？她的预言甚至毫无意义。”
“她曾经提到过地球吗？”
“我不知道，即使有我也不会惊讶。”
“提起地球没让你摸不着头脑，你知道有关地球旧事吗？”
此时，堤沙佛才显出惊讶的表情：“当然啦，谢顿老爷。所有的人类都来自那个世界……据说如此。”
“据说如此？你不相信吗？”
“我？我受过教育，但许多无知的民众都相信。”
“有没有关于地球的胶卷书？”
“儿童故事有时会提到地球。我记得当我还是个小男孩的时候，我最喜欢的故事是这样开头的：‘很久以前，当地球还是唯一行星的时候……’记得吗，卡西莉娅？你也喜欢这个故事。”
卡西莉娅耸了耸肩，不愿就此软化。
“我希望改天能看一看，”谢顿说，“但我指的是真正的胶卷书……呃……教学用的……或是影片……或是列印表。”
“我从未听说有这些东西，不过图书馆……”
“我会去那里试试看——有没有任何禁忌不准提到地球？”
“禁忌是什么？”
“我的意思是，有没有一个强烈的习俗，不准民众提到地球，或是不准外人问起？”
堤沙佛的惊讶看来如此货真价实，似乎毫无必要等待他的回答。
铎丝插嘴道：“有没有什么规定，不准外人前往脐眼？”
这时堤沙佛变得一本正经：“没有什么规定，但任何人到那坐去都是不智之举，我就不会去。”
铎丝说：“为什么？”
“它充满危险，充满暴力！每个人都带着武器——我的意思是说，虽然达尔是个武装地区，可是在脐眼他们真的使用武器。留在这里吧，这里才安全。”
“目前是如此。”卡西莉娅以阴郁的口吻说，“总之，我们最好离开这个地方，这年头热闾工无处不在。”说完，她又朝谢顿的方向白了一眼。
谢帧说：“你说达尔是个武装地区是什么意思？帝国政府有管制武器的强硬规定。”
“我知道，”堤沙佛说，“这里没有麻痹枪或震波武器，也没有心灵探测器或任何类似的东西，可是我们有刀。”他看来有些尴尬。
铎丝说：“你随身带着刀吗，堤沙佛？”
“我？”他现厌恶至极的表情，“我是个爱好和平的人，而且这里是个安全的小区。”
“我们家里藏了几把，”卡西莉娅一面说，一面又哼了一声。“我们并不那么确定这是个安全的小区。”
“是不是每个人都随身带着刀？”铎丝问道。
“几乎人人都带，凡纳比里夫人。”堤沙佛说，“这是一种习俗，但不代表每个人都用得到。”
“脐眼的人却用得到，我这么想。”铎丝说。
“有些时候。他们一激动就会打起来。”
“政府准许这种事吗？我是指帝国政府？”
“他们有时也会试图将脐眼扫荡干净，呵是刀子太容易藏匿，而且这种风气又很难扭转。此外，被杀害的几乎总是达尔人，我想帝国政府不会为此太过烦心。”
“万一被杀的是个外地人呢？”
“如果有人报案，是有可能惊动到帝国官员。不过实际上，绝不会有人看到或知道任何事。帝国官员有时会根据普通法令逮捕民众，但他们向来无法证明任何事。我想他们总是认定，外地人到那里去是自己的错。所以不要前往脐眼，即使你有一把刀。”
谢顿烦躁地摇摇头：“我不会带刀去，我根本不知道如何使用。”
“那还不简单，谢顿老爷，不要进去。”堤沙佛忧心忡忡地摇了摇头，“总之不要进去。”
“或许我也无法做到这点。”谢顿说。
铎丝瞪着他，显然是不耐烦了，然后她对堤沙佛说：“哪里才能买到刀子？或是我们能借用你们的吗？”
卡西莉娅立刻应道：“没有人借用别人的刀子，你必须自己去买。”
堤沙佛说：“卖刀的店里到处都有——其实不该这样，理论上它们是不合法的，你知道吧。然而，任何用品店里都有出售。如果你看到店面展示着一台洗衣机，那就准设错。”
“还有，怎样到脐眼去？”谢顿问道。
“搭乘磁浮捷运。”堤沙佛无奈地望向铎丝，铎丝正皱起了眉头。
谢顿又接着问：“抵达磁浮捷运站之后呢？”
“搭上向东的列车，注意沿途的路标。不过假使你非去不可，谢顿老爷，”堤沙佛迟疑了一下，又说，“你一定不能带凡纳比里夫人。妇女有时会遭到……更糟的下场。”
“她不会去。”谢顿说。
“只怕她会去。”铎丝的回答斩钉截铁。

Chapter 68

The appliance store dealers mustache was clearly as lush as it had been in his younger days, but it was grizzled now, even though the hair on his head was still black. He touched the mustache out of sheer habit as he gazed at Dors and brushed it back on each side.
He said, "Youre not a Dahlite."
"Yes, but I still want a knife."
He said, "Its against the law to sell knives."
Dors said, "Im not a policewoman or a government agent of any sort. Im going to Billibotton."
He stared at her thoughtfully. "Alone?"
"With my friend." She jerked her thumb over her shoulder in the direction of Seldon, who was waiting outside sullenly.
"Youre buying it for him?" He stared at Seldon and it didnt take him long to decide. "Hes an outsider too. Let him come in and buy it for himself."
"Hes not a government agent either. And Im buying it for myself."
The dealer shook his head. "Outsiders are crazy. But if you want to spend some credits, Ill take them from you."
He reached under the counter, brought out a stub, turned it with a slight and expert motion, and the knife blade emerged.
"Is that the largest you have?"
"Best womans knife made."
"Show me a mans knife."
"You dont want one thats too heavy. Do you know how to use one of these things?"
"Ill learn and Im not worried about heavy. Show me a mans knife."
The dealer smiled. "Well, if you want to see one--"
He moved farther down the counter and brought up a much fatter stub. He gave it a twist and what appeared to be a butchers knife emerged. He handed it to her, handle first, still smiling.
She said, "Show me that twist of yours."
He showed her on a second knife, slowly twisting one way to make the blade appear, then the other way to make it disappear. "Twist and squeeze," he said.
"Do it again, sir."
The dealer obliged.
Dors said, "All right, close it and toss me the haft."
He did, in a slow upward loop.
She caught it, handed it back, and said, "Faster."
He raised his eyebrows and then, without warning, backhanded it to her left side. She made no attempt to bring over her right hand, but caught it with her left and the blade showed tumescently at once--then disappeared. The dealers mouth fell open.
"And this is the largest you have?" she said.
"It is. If you try to use it, it will just tire you out."
"Ill breathe deeply. Ill take a second one too."
"For your friend?"
"No. For me."
"You plan on using two knives?"
"Ive got two hands."
The dealer sighed. "Mistress, please stay out of Billibotton. You dont know what they do to women there."
"I can guess. How do I put these knives on my belt?"
"Not the one youve got on, Mistress. Thats not a knife belt. I can sell you one, though."
"Will it hold two knives?"
"I might have a double belt somewhere. Not much call for them."
"Im calling for them."
"I may not have it in your size."
"Then well cut it down or something."
"It will cost you a lot of credits."
"My credit tile will cover it."
When she emerged at last, Seldon said sourly, "You look ridiculous with that bulky belt."
"Really, Hari? Too ridiculous to go with you to Billibotton? Then lets both go back to the apartment."
"No. Ill go on by myself. Ill be safer by myself."
Dors said, "There is no use saying that, Hari. We both go back or we both go forward. Under no circumstances do we separate."
And somehow the firm look in her blue eyes, the set to her lips, and the manner in which her hands had dropped to the hafts at her belt, convinced Seldon she was serious.
"Very well," he said, "but if you survive and if I ever see Hummin again, my price for continuing to work on psychohistory--much as I have grown fond of you--will be your removal. Do you understand?"
And suddenly Dors smiled. "Forget it. Dont practice your chivalry on me. Nothing will remove me. Do you understand?"
第六十八章
　　用品店老板的八字胡显然与年轻时一样浓密，只是颜色已变斑白，不过他的头发乌黑依旧。他一面凝视着铎丝，一面抚摸着两撇胡子，并将它朝两侧往后梳，这全然是一种习惯性动作。
他说：“你不是达尔人。”
“没错，但我仍还要一把刀。”
他说：“卖刀是违法的。”
铎丝说：“我小是女警，也不是什么政府特务。我要到脐眼去。”
他意味深长地瞪着她：“一个人？”
“和我的朋友一起。”她将拇指朝肩后一甩，指向谢顿所在的位置，后者正绷着脸等在外面。
“你是要帮他买？”他瞪了谢顿一下，很快就做出判断。“他也是个外地人，让他进来自己买。”
“他也不是政府特务，另外，我买刀是给自己用。”
老板摇了摇头：“外地人都很疯狂。但如果你想花掉些信用点，我倒是乐意帮你的忙。”他伸手从柜台下面掏出一根粗短的圆棒，再以行家的动作轻轻一转，刀锋立刻冒出。
“这是你这里最大的一种吗？”
“最好的女用刀。”
“拿一把男用的给我看看。”
“你不会想要一把太重的。你知道如何使用这种家伙吗？”
“我可以学，而且我不担心重量。拿一把男用的给我看看。”
老板微微一笑：“好吧，既然你想要看——”他伸手探向柜台的更下层，拿出一根粗得多的圆棒，随手一扭，一把看来像屠夫用的利刃便出现了。
他将刀柄朝前交给她，脸上仍旧带着微笑。
她说：“让我看看你是怎么扭的。”
他掏出另一把为她示范，先慢慢扭向一侧，刀锋立时闪现，再扭向另一侧，刀锋随即收进。“一面扭一面压。”他说。
“再做一遍，阁下。”
老板遵命照办。
钎丝说：“好啦，收起来，将刀柄丢给我。”
他依言照做，刀子缓缓画出一个上抛弧线。
她接住后又还回去，说：“快一点。”
老板扬起眉毛，然后在毫无预警的情况下，反手将刀丢向她的左侧。她并未试图将右手伸过去，反而直接用左手将它接住。刀锋立刻冒出头来，下一刻又随即消失，老板看得目瞪口呆。
“这是你这里最大的一种？”她说。
“是的。如果你试图用这把刀，一定会令你筋疲力尽。”
“我会做深呼吸。我还要另外一把。”
“给你的朋友？”
“不，给我自己。”
“你打算用两把刀？”
“我有两只手。”
老板叹了一声：“夫人，奉劝你离脐眼远一点。你不知道他们那里怎样对付女人。”
“我能猜到。我如何将这两把刀插进皮带里？”
“你身上那条皮带不行，夫人，那不是刀带。不过，我可以卖给你一条。”
“它能装两把刀吗？”
“我应该有一条双刀带放在哪里，它们的需求量不大。”
“你现在就有一个买主。”
“我也许没有符合你的尺寸。”
“那么我们可以把它切短，或是想别的办法，”
“你得花上许多信用点。”
“我的信用磁卡付得起。”
当她终于走出来时，谢顿口气有点尖酸地说：“你系着这条笨重的皮带看来真滑稽。”
“真的吗，哈里？是不是太滑稽了，不配跟你到脐眼去？那就让我们一同回公寓吧。”
“不，我要单独去，我自己去会比较安全。”
铎丝说：“这样说一点用也没有，哈里。我们一起向后转，否则就一起向前走。不论在任何情况下，我们都不会分开。”
此时，她监眼珠所透出的坚决眼神，她嘴角弯成的弧度，以及她双手放在腰际刀柄上的姿势，使谢顿终于相信她是认真的。
“很好，”他说，“但如果你活着回来，如果我还能见到夫铭，那么，我继续研究心理史学的代价就是让你离去——虽然我越来越喜欢你。你能了解吗？”
铎丝突然露出微笑：“忘掉这件事吧，别在我身上展现你的骑士精神。无论如何我都不会离去，你能了解吗？”
Chapter 69
They got off the Expressway where the sign, flickering in the air, said: BILLIBOTTON. As perhaps an indication of what might be expected, the second I was smeared, a mere blob of fainter light.
They made their way out of the car and down to the walkway below. It was early afternoon and at first glance, Billibotton seemed much like the part of Dahl they had left.
The air, however, had a pungent aroma and the walkway was littered with trash.
One could tell that auto-sweeps were not to be found in the neighborhood. And, although the walkway looked ordinary enough, the atmosphere was uncomfortable and as tense as a too-tightly coiled spring. Perhaps it was the people. There seemed the normal number of pedestrians, but they were not like pedestrians elsewhere, Seldon thought. Ordinarily, in the press of business, pedestrians were self-absorbed and in the endless crowds on the endless thoroughfares of Trantor, people could only survive--psychologically--by ignoring each other. Eyes slid away. Brains were closed off. There was an artificial privacy with each person enclosed in a velvet fog of his or her own making. Or there was the ritualistic friendliness of an evening promenade in those neighborhoods that indulged in such things. But here in Billibotton, there was neither friendliness nor neutral withdrawal. At least not where outsiders were concerned. Every person who passed, moving in either direction, turned to stare at Seldon and Dors. Every pair of eyes, as though attached by invisible cords to the two outsiders, followed them with ill will.
The clothing of the Billibottoners tended to be smudged, old, and sometimes corn. There was a patina of ill-washed poverty over them and Seldon felt uneasy at the slickness of his own new clothes.
He said, "Where in Billibotton does Mother Rittah live, do you suppose?"
"I dont know," said Dors. "You brought us here, so you do the supposing. I intend to confine myself to the task of protection and I think Im going to find it necessary to do just that."
Seldon said, "I assumed it would only be necessary to ask the way of any passerby, but somehow Im not encouraged to do so."
"I dont blame you. I dont think youll find anyone springing to your assistance."
"On the other hand, there are such things as youngsters." He indicated one with a brief gesture of one hand. A boy who looked to be about twelve--in any case young enough to lack the universal adult male mustache had come to a full halt and was staring at them.
Dors said, "Youre guessing that a boy that age has not yet developed the full Billibottonian dislike of outsiders."
"At any rate," said Seldon, "Im guessing he is scarcely large enough to have developed the full Billibottonian penchant for violence. I suppose he might run away and shout insults from a distance if we approach him, but I doubt hell attack us."
Seldon raised his voice. "Young man."
The boy took a step backward and continued to stare.
Seldon said, "Come here," and beckoned.
The boy said, "Wa for, guy?"
"So I can ask you directions. Come closer, so I dont have to shout."
The boy approached two steps closer. His face was smudged, but his eyes were bright and sharp. His sandals were of different make and there was a large patch on one leg of his trousers.
He said, "Wa kind o directions?"
"Were trying to find Mother Rittah."
The boys eyes flickered. "Wa for, guy?"
"Im a scholar. Do you know what a scholar is?"
"Ya went to school?"
"Yes. Didnt you?"
The boy spat to one side in contempt. "Nah."
"I want advice from Mother Rittah--if youll take me to her."
"Ya want your fortune? Ya come to Billibotton, guy, with your fancy clothes, so I can tell ya your fortune. All bad."
"Whats your name, young man?"
"Whats it to ya?"
"So we can speak in a more friendly fashion. And so you can take me to Mother Rittahs place. Do you know where she lives?"
"Maybe yes, maybe no. My names Raych. Whats in it for me if I take ya?"
"What would you like, Raych?"
The boys eyes halted at Dorss belt. Raych said, "The lady got a couple o knives. Gimme one and Ill take ya to Mother Rittah."
"Those are grown peoples knives, Raych. Youre too young."
"Then I guess Im too young to know where Mother Rittah lives." And he looked up slyly through the shaggy halt that curtained his eyes.
Seldon grew uneasy. It was possible they might attract a crowd. Several men had stopped already, but had then moved on when nothing of interest seemed to be taking place. If, however, the boy grew angry and lashed out at them in word or deed, people would undoubtedly gather.
He smiled and said, "Can you read, Raych?"
Raych spat again. "Nah! Who wants to read?"
"Can you use a computer?"
"A talking computer? Sure. Anyone can."
"Ill tell you what, then. You take me to the nearest computer store and Ill buy you a little computer all your own and software that will teach you to read. A few weeks and youll be able to read."
It seemed to Seldon that the boys eyes sparkled at the thought, but--if so--they hardened at once.
"Nah, Knife or nothin."
"Thats the point, Raych. You learn to read and dont tell anyone and you can surprise people. After a while you can bet them you can read. Bet them five credits. You can win a few extra credits that way and you can buy a knife of your own."
The boy hesitated. "Nah! No one will bet me. No one got credits."
"If you can read, you can get a job in a knife store and you can save your wages and get a knife at a discount. How about that?"
"When ya gonna buy the talking computer?"
"Right now. Ill give it to you when I see Mother Rittah."
"You got credits?"
"I have a credit tile."
"Lets see ya buy the computer."
The transaction was carried through, but when the boy reached for it, Seldon shook his head and put it inside his pouch. "Youve got to get me to Mother Rittah first, Raych. Are you sure you know where to find her?"
Raych allowed a look of contempt to cross his face. "Sure I do. Ill take ya there, only ya better hand over the computer when we get there or Ill get some guys I know after you and the lady, so ya better watch out."
"You dont have to threaten us," said Seldon. "Well take care of our end of the deal."
Raych led them quickly along the walkway, past curious stares. Seldon was silent during the walk and so was Dors. Dors was far less lost in her own thoughts, though, for she clearly remained conscious of the surrounding people at all times. She kept meeting, with a level glare, the eyes of those passersby that turned toward them. On occasion, when there were footsteps behind them, she turned to look grimly back.
And then Raych stopped and said, "In here. She aint homeless, ya know."
They followed him into an apartment complex and Seldon, who had had the intention of following their route with a view to retracing his steps later, was quickly lost.
He said, "How do you know your way through these alleys, Raych?"
The boy shrugged. "I been loafin through them since I was a kid," he said. "Besides, the apartments are numbered--where they aint broken off--and theres arrows and things. You cant get lost if you know the tricks."
Raych knew the tricks, apparently, and they wandered deeper into the complex. Hanging over it all was an air of total decay: disregarded debris, inhabitants slinking past in clear resentment of the outsiders invasion. Unruly youngsters ran along the alleys in pursuit of some game or other. Some of them yelled, "Hey, get out o the way!" when their levitating ball narrowly missed Dors. And finally, Raych stopped before a dark scarred door on which the number 2782 glowed feebly.
"This iiiit," he said and held out his hand.
"First lets see whos inside," said Seldon softly. He pushed the signal button and nothing happened.
"It dont work," said Raych. "Ya gotta bang. Loud. She dont hear too good."
Seldon pounded his fist on the door and was rewarded with the sound of movement inside. A shrill voice called out, "Who wants Mother Rittah?"
Seldon shouted, "Two scholars!"
He tossed the small computer, with its small package of software attached, to Raych, who snatchediit, grinned, and took off at a rapid run.
Seldon then turned to face the opening door and Mother Rittah.

第六十九章
　　在凭空闪烁的路标写着“脐眼”的那一站，他们两人下了磁浮捷运。路标第一个字左边被弄脏了，只剩下一个暗淡的光点，这也许是一种意料中的象征。
他们走出车厢之后，沿着下方的人行道前进。此时刚过正午，乍看之下，脐眼似乎很像他们在达尔居住的那一带。
然而，空气中有一种刺鼻的味道，人行道处处可见丢弃的垃圾。由此即可看出，这个小区中绝对没有自动扫街器，此外，虽然人行道看来并无不同，此地的气氛却令人不舒服，有如扭得太紧的弹簧那般紧绷。
或许是因为人的关系，谢顿想，这里的行人数目并无太大差异，但他们与其他地方的行人不一样。通常，在繁重工作的压力下．每个行人心中只有自己；置身川陀无数大街小巷的无数人群中，人们唯有忽略他人才能活下去——就心理层面而言。例如目光绝不流连，大脑完全封闭；每个人罩在各自的浓雾中，隐匿在一种人工的隐私里。反之，在那些热衷于黄昏漫步的小区中，则充满一种仪式化的亲切感。
然而在脐眼这里，既没有亲切感也没有漠然的回避——至少对外人而言如此。每个擦身而过的人，不论是来是往，都会转头朝谢顿与铎丝瞪上一眼。每对眼睛仿佛都有隐形绳索系在这两个外人身上，带着恶意紧紧追着他们不放。
脐眼人的衣着较为肮脏、老旧，有些已经破损。这些衣服都带着一种没洗干净的晦暗，使谢顿对自己光鲜的新衣感到不安。
他说：“你想，瑞塔嬷嬷会住在脐眼哪里？”
“我不知道，”铎丝说，“你把我们带到这里，所以应该由你来想。我打算专注于保镖的工作，我想我唯一得做的事，就是保护你的安全。”
谢顿说：“我认为现在得做的事是找个人问路，但我就是不太想这么做。”
“我不会怪你，我想你找不到任何愿意帮助你的热心人士。”
“话说回来，别忘了还有少年人。”谢顿随手指了指其中一个。那个男孩看来大约十二岁，尚未蓄起成年男子不可或缺的八字胡，正停下脚步盯着他们两人看。
铎丝说：“你是在猜想，脐眼人对外人的厌恶还不会出现在这种年纪的男孩身上。”
“至少，”谢顿说，“我猜想他的年纪还不够大，不至于具有脐眼的暴力倾向。如果我们走近他，他可能会拔腿就跑，在老远的地方高声辱骂，但我不信他会攻击我们。”
谢顿提高声音说：“年轻人。”
男孩向后退了一步，继续瞪着他们两人。
谢顿说：“到这里来。”同时招了招手。
男孩说：“干啥，哥儿们？”
“我想跟你问路。走近点，我才不用大声吼。”
男孩向前走了两步。他的脸孔脏兮兮的，一双眼睛却明亮而敏锐。他穿的凉鞋式样与众不同，一只短裤腿上有个大补丁。他说：“啥样的路？”
“我们想要去找瑞塔嬷嬷。”
男孩的眼睛亮了起来：“干啥？”
“我是一名学者，你知道学者是什么吗？”
“你上过学？”
“没错，你没有吗？”
男孩不屑地向一旁啐了一口：“没。”
“我有事要请教瑞塔嬷嬷，希望你能带我去找她。”
“你要算命？哥儿们，你穿着拉风的衣服来脐眼，连我都能帮你算命，霉运当头。”
“你叫什么名字，年轻人？”
“这跟你何干？”
“这样我们才能以更友善的方式交谈，这样你才能带我去瑞塔嬷嬷的住处。你知道她住在哪里吗？”
“也许知，也许不知。我叫芮奇，如果我带你去，我有什么好处？”
“你想要什么，芮奇？”
芮奇的日光停留在铎丝的腰带上，他说：“这大姐带着双刀，给我一把，我就带你去找瑞塔嬷嬷。”
“那是成人用的刀，芮奇，你的年纪还太小。”
“那我也认为我的年纪太小，根本不知道瑞塔嬷嬷住在哪里。”说完他抬起头，透过遮住眼睛的浓密头发狡猾地望着对方。
谢顿开始感到不安，他们这样有可能引来一群人。几名男子已经停下来，但在发现似乎不会发生什么有趣的事之后，他们全都掉头离去。然而，如果这个男孩发起脾气，以言语或行动攻击他们，街上的人无疑会群聚过来。
他微微一笑：“你识字吗，芮奇？”
芮奇又啐了一口：“不！谁要识字？”
“你会用计算机吗？”
“会说话的计算机？当然，任何人都会。”
“那么，我告诉你怎么办。你带我到最近的一家计算机店，我帮你买一台属于你自己的小计算机，以及一套能教你识字的软件。几星期之后，你就识字了。”
谢顿发觉男孩的眼睛似乎因此亮了起来，但只一会儿，那双眼睛又随即转趋强硬：“不，不给刀子就拉倒。”
“关键就在这里，芮奇。你自己学识字，别告诉任何人。过一阵子之后，你可以打赌说你会识字，和他们打赌行个信用点。这样你能赢得不少零用钱，可以帮自己买把刀子。”
男孩犹豫了一下：“不！没人会和我打赌，没人有信用点。”
“如果你识字，就能在刀店找到一份工作。你把工资存起来，可以用折扣价买一把刀子。这样好小好？”
“你什么时候去买会说话的计算机？”
“现在，等我见到瑞塔嬷嬷就给你。”
“你有信用点？”
“我有一张信用磁卡。”
“让我们一起去买计算机。”
计算机的交易进行得很顺利，但是当男孩伸手要接过计算机时，谢顿却摇了摇头，将它放进自己的囊袋。“你得先带我去找瑞塔嬷嬷，芮奇。你确定自己知道在哪儿能找到她吗？”
芮奇让不屑的表情掠过脸庞：“我当然确定，我会带你到那儿去，只是我们到了那里之后，你最好把计算机给我。否则我会找些我认识的哥儿们。去追你和这个大姐，所以你最好小心点。”
“你不必威胁我们，”谢顿说，“我们自会履行承诺。”
芮奇带着他们沿人行道快步走去，穿过了许多好奇的目光。
谢顿在行走时一言不发，铎丝也一样。不过与谢顿比较之下，铎丝儿乎没有什么心事，因为她显然始终在警戒周遭的人群。对于那些转头看他们的路人，她一律以凶狠的眼神直视回去。有些时候，当他们身后传来脚步声，她会立刻转头怒目而视。
然后芮奇停了下来，说道：“就在这里。你知道，她不是无家可归。”
他们跟着他进入一组公寓群。谢顿本想在心中默记走过的路线，以便待会儿能自行找到出路，但很快就迷失了方向。
他说：“你怎么知道在这此巷道中该走哪一条，芮奇？”
男孩耸了耸肩：“打从我还是小孩的时候，我就开始在这些巷道中游荡。”他说，“此外，这些公寓都有号码——只要没脱落，而且还有箭头和其他记号。如果你知道这些窍门，你就不可能迷路。”
芮奇显然深通这些窍门，于是他们逐渐深入公寓群。目所能及尽是一种完全腐朽的气氛：无人清理的瓦砾堆，居民脸上一闪而过的对外人入侵的明显恨意。又皮又野的少年沿着巷道奔跑追逐，似乎正在进行某种游戏。当他们的飞球险些击中铎丝时，有些还大叫道：“嘿，让路！”
最后，芮奇停在一扇斑驳的深色门前，上面微微闪着二七八七这组数宁。
“这里就是。”他一面说，一面伸出手来。
“先让我们看看谁在里面。”谢顿轻声说道。他按下讯号钮，可是没有任何反应。
“没用，”芮奇说，“你得捶门，捶得很响才行。她的耳朵不太好。”
于是谢顿握拳猛捶门板，里面立刻有了动静。一个尖锐的声音传出来：“谁要见瑞塔嬷嬷？”
谢顿喊道：“两名学者！”
他将小计算机连同附带的软件套件一起扔给芮奇，芮奇一把抓住，咧嘴一笑，立刻快步跑开了。然后谢顿转过头来，面对着打开的门与门后的瑞塔嬷嬷。
Chapter 70

Mother Rittah was well into her seventies, perhaps, but had the kind of face that, at first sight, seemed to belie that. Plump cheeks, a little mouth, a small round chin slightly doubled. She was very short--not quite 1.5 meters tall--and had a thick body.
But there were fine wrinkles about her eyes and when she smiled, as she smiled at the sight of them, others broke out over her face. And she moved with difficulty.
"Come in, come in," she said in a soft high-pitchedivoice and peered at them as though her eyesight was beginning to fail. "Outsiders ... Outworlders even. Am I right? You dont seem to have the Trantor smell about you."
Seldon wished she hadnt mentioned smell. The apartment, overcrowded and littered with small possessions that seemed dim and dusty, reeked with food odors that were on the edge of rancidity. The air was so thick and clinging that he was sure his clothes would smell strongly of it when they left.
He said, "You are right, Mother Rittah. I am Hari Seldon of Helicon. My friend is Dors Venabili of Cinna."
"So," she said, looking about for an unoccupied spot on the floor where she could invite them to sit, but finding none suitable.
Dors said, "We are willing to stand, Mother."
"What?" she looked up at Dors. "You must speak briskly, my child. My hearing is not what it was when I was your age."
"Why dont you get a hearing device?" said Seldon, raising his voice.
"It wouldnt help, Master Seldon. Something seems to be wrong with the nerve and I have no money for nerve rebuilding.--You have come to learn the future from old Mother Rittah?"
"Not quite," said Seldon. "I have come to learn the past."
"Excellent. It is such a strain to decide what people want to hear."
"It must be quite an art," said Dors, smiling.
"It seems easy, but one has to he properly convincing. I earn my fees."
"If you have a credit outlet," said Seldon. "We will pay any reasonable fees if you tell us about Earth--without cleverly designing what you tell us to suit what we want to hear. We wish to hear the truth."
The old woman, who had been shuffling about the room, making adjustments here and there, as though to make it all prettier and more suitable for important visitors, stopped short. "What do you want to know about Earth?"
"What is it, to begin with?"
The old woman turned and seemed to gaze off into space. When she spoke, her voice was low and steady.
"It is a world, a very old planet. It is forgotten and lost."
Dors said, "It is not part of history. We know that much."
"It comes before history, child," said Mother Rittah solemnly. "It existed in the dawn of the Galaxy and before the dawn. It was the only world with humanity." She nodded firmly.
Seldon said, "Was another name for Earth ... Aurora?"
And now Mother Rittahs face misted into a frown. "Where did you hear that?"
"In my wanderings. I have heard of an old forgotten world named Aurora on which humanity lived in primordial peace."
"Its a lie." She wiped her mouth as though to get the taste of what she had just heard out of it. "That name you mention must never be mentioned except as the place of Evil. It was the beginning of Evil. Earth was alone till Evil came, along with its sister worlds. Evil nearly destroyed Earth, but Earth rallied and destroyed Evil--with the help of heroes."
"Earth was before this Evil. Are you sure of that?"
"Long before. Earth was alone in the Galaxy for thousands of years--millions of years."
"Millions of years? Humanity existed on it for millions of years with no other people on any other world?"
"Thats true. Thats true. Thats true."
"But how do you know all this? Is it all in a computer program? Or a printout? Do you have anything I can read?"
Mother Rittah shook her head. "I heard the old stories from my mother, who heard it from hers, and so on far back. I have no children, so I tell the stories to others, but it may come to an end. This is a time of disbelief."
Dors said, "Not really, Mother. There are people who speculate about prehistoric times and who study some of the tales of lost worlds."
Mother Rittah made a motion of her arm as though to wipe it away. "They look at it with cold eyes. Scholarly. They try to fit it in with their notions. I could tell you stories for a year of the great hero Ba-Lee, but you would have no time to listen and I have lost the strength to tell."
Seldon said, "Have you ever heard of robots?"
The old woman shuddered and her voice was almost a scream. "Why do you ask such things? Those were artificial human beings, evil in themselves and the work of the Evil worlds. They were destroyed and should never be mentioned."
"There was one special robot, wasnt there, that the Evil worlds hated?"
Mother Rittah tottered toward Seldon and peered into his eyes. He could feel her hot breath on his face. "Have you come to mock me? You know of these things and yet you ask? Why do you ask?"
"Because I wish to know."
"There was an artificial human being who helped Earth. He was Da-Nee, friend of Ba-Lee. He never died and lives somewhere, waiting for his time to return. None knows when that time will be, but someday he will come and restore the great old days and remove all cruelty, injustice, and misery. That is the promise."
At this, she closed her eyes and smiled, as if remembering ...
Seldon waited a while in silence, then sighed and said, "Thank you, Mother Rittah. You have been very helpful. What is your fee?"
"So pleasant to meet Outworlders," the old woman replied. "Ten credits. May I offer you some refreshment?"
"No, thank you," said Seldon earnestly. "Please take twenty. You need only tell us how to get back to the Expressway from here.--And, Mother Rittah, if you can arrange to have some of your tales of Earth put into a computer disc, I will pay you well."
"I would need so much strength. How well?"
"It would depend on how long the story is and how well it is told. I might pay a thousand credits."
Mother Rittah licked her lips. "A thousand credits? But how will I find you when the story is told?"
"I will give you the computer code number at which I can be reached."
After Seldon gave Mother Rittah the code number, he and Dors left, thankful for the comparatively clean odor of the alley outside. They walked briskly in the direction indicated by the old woman.
第七十章
　　瑞塔嬷嬷或许已有七十好几，不过她的脸孔乍一看似乎没那么老。她有着丰满的面颊、一张小嘴，以及又小又圆的双下巴。她的个子很矮——还不到一百五十厘米，却有一副粗壮的身躯。
不过她双眼周围有着细微的皱纹。当她微笑的时候——例如她见到他们之后露出的笑容——脸部其他各处的皱纹也会绽露出来。此外，她的行动有些困难，“进来，进来。”她一面以轻柔高亢的声音说，一面眯着眼睛凝视他们两人，仿佛她的视力已开始减退。“外人……甚至是外星人士，我说对了吗？你们身上似乎没有川陀的气味。”
谢顿真希望她没提到气味。这间过分拥挤的公寓发出一股食物的怪味，几乎接近腐臭的味道。屋内还有许多四处乱丢的小东西，看来陈旧而盖满灰尘。这里的空气浑浊黏稠，他可以确定当他们离去后，他的衣服仍会带着这种强烈的气味。
他说：“你说对了，瑞塔嬷嬷。我是来自赫利肯的哈里•谢顿，我的朋友是来自锡纳的铎丝•凡纳比里。”
“好。”她一面说，一面在地板上寻找空位，以便邀他们坐下，可是找不到合适的地方。
铎丝说：“我们乐意站着，嬷嬷。”
“什么？”她抬起头望向铎丝，“你说话必须中气十足，孩子。我的听力已经不像你这个年纪时那么好。”
“你为什么不弄个助听装置？”谢顿提高音量说。
“那没有帮助，谢顿老爷。好像是神经方面出了毛病，我却没钱去做神经重建。你们是来向瑞塔老嬷嬷请教未来之事？”
“并不尽然，”谢顿说，“我是来请教过去之事。”
“好极了。判断人们想听些什么可不容易。”
“那必定是一门高深的艺术。”铎丝微笑着说。
“它看来容易，可是必须说得别人心服口服。我就靠它赚钱为生。”
“如果你有刷卡插座，”谢顿说，“我们会付你任何合理的酬劳。只要你告诉我们有关地球的事，不要为了满足我们而编织巧妙的话语，我们只想听事实。”
老妇人本来一直在房中踱来踱去，东摸摸、两弄弄，仿佛要将房间弄得更漂亮，更适合两位来访的贵客。此时她忽然停下来．说道：“你要知道有关地球的什么事？”
“首先，它究竟是什么？”
老妇人转过身来，目光似乎投射到太空中。当她开始说话的时候，她的声音变得低沉而稳重。
“它是一个世界，一个非常古老的行星。它遭人遗忘，如今下落不明。”
铎丝说：“它并非历史的一部分，这点我们还知道。”
“它比历史更为古老，孩子。”瑞塔嬷嬷严肃地说，“它存在于银河的黎明期，甚至在黎明期之前。当时它是唯一拥有人类的世界。”她坚定地点了点头。
谢顿说：“地球的别名是不是……奥罗拉？”
这时，瑞塔嬷嬷的脸孔突然皱成一团：“你是从哪里听来的？”
“在我四处飘荡的过程中，听说有个古老而遭人遗忘的世界叫奥罗拉，上面的人曾经享有太初的平静岁月。”
“那是个谎言。”她擦了擦嘴，仿佛要将她刚才听到的东两从嘴边抹去，“你提到的那个名字绝对不可再提，它只能指邪恶之地，它是邪恶的源头。在邪恶之地和它的姐妹世界登场前，地球一直是独一无二的。邪恶之地几乎毁灭了地球，但是地球人最后团结起来，借着一些英雄的帮助，终于摧毁了邪恶之地。”
“地球早于这个邪恶之地，你确定这点吗？”
“早得太多。地球曾在银河中独处数万年——乃至数百万年。”
“数百万年？人类在其上存在了数百万年，而其他任何世界都没有人？”
“没错，那是事实，事实就是如此。”
“但你是如何知道这些的呢？这些都在一个计算机程序里吗？或是住一份列印表中？你有任何东西能让我读一读吗？”
瑞塔嬷嬷摇了摇头：“我从我母亲那里听来这些古老的故事，她又是从她的母亲那里听来，自古就是这样传下来的。我没有子女，所以我把这些故事说给别人听。可是它也许会就此失传，这是个失去信仰的时代。”
铎丝说：“并非真正如此，嬷嬷。还是有人在推论史前时代的种种可能，并且研究有关那些失落世界的传说。”
瑞塔嬷嬷手臂挥了挥，仿佛要将那句话扫开。“他们用冷眼面对这个问题，以学术的眼光。他们试图将它纳入他们的观念中。有关大英雄巴雳的故事，我可以跟你说上一年，但你不会有那么多时间听，我也没有那么多精力讲。”
谢顿说：“你曾听说过机仆吗？”
老妇人突然抖了一下，她的声音几乎变作尖叫。“你为什么要问这种事？那种东西是人工的人类，是那些邪恶世界的产物，本身就是一种邪恶。它们早就遭到毁灭，再也不该提起。”
“曾有一个特殊的机仆，是那些邪恶世界憎恨的对象，对不对？”
瑞塔嬷嬷蹒跚地走向谢顿，紧紧盯着他的双眼。他甚至能感到她的热气喷在自己脸上。“你是专门来愚弄我的吗？你已经知道这些事，而你还要问？你为什么要问？”
“因为我希望知道。”
“曾有一个人工的人类帮助地球，他名叫丹尼，是巴雳的朋友。他从来没死，一直活在某个角落，等待他的时代重返。没有人知道那是什么时候，不过总有一天他会回来，复兴那个伟大的古老时代，并除去所有的残酷、不义和悲惨。那是他的承诺。”说到这里，她闭上眼睛．露出微笑，好像回想起……
谢顿默默等了一会儿，然后叹了一口气。“谢谢你，瑞塔嬷嬷。你对我有很大的帮助，我该付你多少酬劳？”
“很高兴能遇见外星人士，”老妇人答道，“十个信用点。我能招待你们一些吃的吗？”
“不用了，谢谢你。”谢顿一本正经地说．“请收下二十点，你只需告诉我们怎样从这里回到捷运站。还有，瑞塔嬷嬷，如果你能设法将有关地球的传说录进电脑磁盘一些，我会付你很好的价钱。”
“有多好？这将花费我不少力气。”
“那要看故事有多长，以及说得有多好。我也许会付一千点。”
瑞塔嬷嬷舔了舔嘴唇：“一千点？可是，当故事录好之后，我要怎样才能找到你？”
“我会给你一个计算机址码，你可以通过它联络到我。”
谢顿将计算机址码写给瑞塔嬷嬷后，便与铎丝一同离去。相较之下，外而巷道的空气清新宜人，令他感到谢天谢地。他们根据老妇人的指引，踏着轻快的步伐向前走去。
Chapter 71
Dors said, "That wasnt a very long interview, Hari."
"I know. The surroundings were terribly unpleasant and I felt I had learned enough. Amazing how these folktales tend to magnify."
"What do you mean, magnify?"
"Well, the Mycogenians fill their Aurora with human beings who lived for centuries and the Dahlites fill their Earth with a humanity that lived for millions of years. And both talk of a robot that lives forever. Still, it makes one think."
"As far as millions of years go, theres room for-- Where are we going?"
"Mother Rittah said we go in this direction till we reach a rest area, then follow the sign for CENTRAL WALKWAY, bearing left, and keep on following the sign. Did we pass a rest area on the way in?"
"We may be leaving by a route different from the one we came in. I dont remember a rest area, but I wasnt watching the route. I was keeping my eye on the people we passed and--"
Her voice died away. Up ahead the alley swelled outward on both sides. Seldon remembered. They had passed that way. There had been a couple of ratty couch pads resting on the walkway floor on either side. There was, however, no need for Dors to watch passersby going out as she had coming in. There were no passersby. But up ahead in the rest area they spotted a group of men, rather large-sized for Dahlites, mustaches bristling, bare upper arms muscular and glistening under the yellowish indoor light of the walkway. Clearly, they were waiting for the Outworlders and, almost automatically, Seldon and Dors came to a halt. For a moment or two, the tableau held. Then Seldon looked behind him hastily. Two or three additional men had stepped into view.
Seldon said between his teeth, "Were trapped. I should not have let you come, Dors."
"On the contrary. This is why Im here, but was it worth your seeing Mother Rittah?"
"If we get out of this, it was."
Seldon then said in a loud and firm voice, "May we pass?"
One of the men ahead stepped forward. He was fully Seldons height of 1.73 meters, but broader in the shoulders and much more muscular. A bit flabby at the waist, though, Seldon noted.
"Im Marron," he said with self-satisfied significance, as though the name ought to have meaning, "and Im here to tell you we dont like Outworlders in our district. You want to come in, all right--but if you want to leave, youll have to pay."
"Very well. How much?"
"All youve got. You rich Outworlders have credit tiles, right? Just hand them over."
"No."
"No point saying no. Well just take them."
"You cant take them without killing me or hurting me and they wont work without my voiceprint. My normal voiceprint."
"Thats not so, Master--see, Im being polite--we can take them away from you without hurting you very much."
"How many of you big strong men will it take? Nine? No." Seldon counted rapidly. "Ten."
"Just one. Me."
"With no help?"
"Just me."
"If the rest of you will clear away and give us room, I would like to see you try it, Marron."
"You dont have a knife, Master. You want one?"
"No, use yours to make the fight even. Ill fight without one."
Marron looked about at the others and said, "Hey, this puny guy is a sport. He dont even sound scared. Thats sort of nice. It would be a shame to hurt him. I tell you what, Master. Ill take the girl. If you want me to stop, hand over your credit tile and her tile and use your right voices to activate them. If you say no, then after Im through with the girl ... and thatll take some time"--he laughed--"Ill just have to hurt you."
"No," said Seldon. "Let the woman go. Ive challenged you to a fight--one to one, you with a knife, me without. If you want bigger odds, Ill fight two of you, but let the woman go."
"Stop, Hari!" cried out Dors. "If he wants me, let him come and get me. You stay right where you are, Hari, and dont move."
"You hear that?" said Marron, grinning broadly. " You stay right where you are, Hari, and dont move. I think the little lady wants me. You two, keep him still."
Each of Seldons arms were caught in an iron grip and he felt the sharp point of a knife in his back.
"Dont move," said a harsh whisper in his ear, "and you can watch. The lady will probably like it. Marrons pretty good at this."
Dors called out again. "Dont move, Hari!" She turned to face Marron watchfully, her half-closed hands poised near her belt.
He closed in on her purposefully and she waited till he had come within arms length, when suddenly her own arms flashed and Marron found himself facing two large knives.
For a moment, he leaned backward and then he laughed. "The little lady has two knives--knives like the big boys have. And Ive only got one. But thats fair enough." His knife was swiftly out. "I hate to have to cut you, little lady, because it will be more fun for both of us if I dont. Maybe I can just knock them out of your hands, huh?"
Dors said, "I dont want to kill you. Ill do all I can to avoid doing so. Just the same, I call on all to witness, that if I do kill you, it is to protect my friend, as I am honor-bound to do."
Marron pretended to be terrified. "Oh, please dont kill me, little lady." Then he burst into laughter and was joined by the other Dahlites present. Marron lunged with his knife, quite wide of the mark. He tried it again, then a third time, but Dors never budged. She made no attempt to fend off any motion that was not truly aimed at her.
Marrons expression darkened. He was trying to make her respond with panic, but he was only making himself seem ineffectual. The next lunge was directly at her and Dorss left-hand blade moved flashingly and caught his with a force that pushed his arm aside. Her right-hand blade flashed inward and made a diagonal slit in his T-shirt. A thin bloody line smeared the dark-haired skin beneath. Marron looked down at himself in shock as the onlookers gasped in surprise.
Seldon felt the grip on him weaken slightly as the two who held him were distracted by a duel not going quite as they had expected. He tensed himself.
Now Marron lunged again and this time his left hand shot outward to enclose Dorss right wrist. Again Dorss left-hand blade caught his knife and held it motionless, while her right hand twisted agilely and drew downward, even as Marrons left hand closed upon it. It closed on nothing but the blade and when he opened his hand there was a bloody line down the palm.
Dors sprang back and Marron, aware of the blood on his chest and hand, roared out chokingly, "Someone toss me another knife!" There was hesitation and then one of the onlookers tossed his own knife underhanded. Marron reached for it, but Dors was quicker. Her right-hand blade struck the thrown knife and sent it flying backward, whirling as it went.
Seldon felt the grips on his arms weaken further. He lifted them suddenly, pushing up and forward, and was free. His two captors turned toward him with a sudden shout, but he quickly kneed one in the groin and elbowed the other in the solar plexus and both went down.
He knelt to draw the knives of each and rose as double-armed as Dors. Unlike Dors, Seldon did not know how to handle the blades, but he knew the Dahlites would scarcely be aware of that.
Dors said, "Just keep them off, Hari. Dont attack yet.--Marron, my next stroke will not be a scratch."
Marron, totally enraged, roared incoherently and charged blindly, attempting by sheer kinetic energy to overwhelm his opponent. Dors, dipping and sidestepping, ducked under his right arm, kicked her foot against his right ankle, and down he crashed, his knife flying.
She then knelt, placed one blade against the back of his neck and the other against his throat, and said, "Yield!"
With another yell, Marron struck out against her with one arm, pushed her to one side, then scrambled to his feet.
He had not yet stood up completely when she was upon him, one knife slashing downward and hacking away a section of his mustache. This time he yowled like a large animal in agony, clapping his hand to his face. When he drew it away, it was dripping blood.
Dors shouted, "It wont grow again, Marron. Some of the lip went with it. Attack once more and youre dead meat."
She waited, but Marron had had enough. He stumbled away, moaning, leaving a trail of blood.
Dors turned toward the others. The two that Seldon had knocked down were still lying there, unarmed and not anxious to get up. She bent down, cut their belts with one of her knives and then slit their trousers. "This way, youll have to hold your pants up when you walk," she said. She stared at the seven men still on their feet, who were watching her with awestruck fascination. "And which of you threw the knife?"
There was silence.
She said, "It doesnt matter to me. Come one at a time or all together, but each time I slash, someone dies."
And with one accord, the seven turned and scurried away. Dors lifted her eyebrows and said to Seldon, "This time, at least, Hummin cant complain that I failed to protect you."
Seldon said, "I still cant believe what I saw. I didnt know you could do anything like that--or talk like that either."
Dors merely smiled. "You have your talents too. We make a good pair. Here, retract your knife blades and put them into your pouch. I think the news will spread with enormous speed and we can get out of Billibotton without fear of being stopped."
She was quite right.
Undercover
DAVAN-- ... In the unsettled times marking the final centuries of the First Galactic Empire, the typical sources of unrest arose from the fact that political and military leaders jockeyed for "supreme" power (a supremacy that grew more worthless with each decade). Only rarely was there anything that could be called a popular movement prior to the advent of psychohistory. In this connection, one intriguing example involves Davan, of whom little is actually known, but who may have met with Hari Seldon at one time when ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第七十一章
　　铎丝说：“这不是一次很长的晤谈，哈里。”
“我知道，可是那里简直令人受不了，而且我觉得打听得够多了。真难想象这些民间传说如何放大到这种程度。”
“你所谓‘放大’是什么意思？”
“嗯，麦曲生人将他们的奥罗拉说成上面住有能活好几世纪的人，达尔人则将他们的地球说成上面存在延续数百万年的人类，而两者都提到一个长生不死的机器人……这的确耐人寻味。”
“既然有好几百万年，就该有机会——我们现在要到哪里？”
“瑞塔嬷嬷说我们应该沿着这个方向走，直到抵达一个休息站，然后找一个写着‘中央走道’的路标，沿着左边走，再一直跟着那个路标前进。我们来的时候有没有经过一个休息站？”
“我们现在走的这条路，也许和来时的路线不同。我不记得有个休息区，不过刚才我没注意看路。我的眼睛一直紧盯着我们身边的路人，而且……”
她的声音逐渐消失——前方的巷道两侧向外敞开。
谢顿想了起来，他们的确曾经路过这里。他还记得在两侧的人行道地板上，弃置着一些破烂的沙发垫。
然而，铎丝不必像进来时那样防范路人，因为现在一个路人也没有。不过在前面的休息区里，他们发现有一群人。就达尔人而言，那群人的个头相当高大。他们的八字胡向上竖起；在人行道的昏黄光线照耀下，他们裸露的上臂全都肌肉暴实，而且皮肤闪着光泽。
显然，他们是在等待这两位外星人士，谢顿与铎丝几乎自然而然停下脚步。一时之间，双方形成了一个静止画面。然后谢顿匆匆向后看了看，发现后面又走出两三个人。
谢顿抿着嘴说：“我们落入陷阱了。我当初不该让你跟来，铎丝。”
“刚好相反，这正是我来这里的原因。可是你为了见瑞塔嬷嬷，付出这种代价值得吗？”
“只要我们能脱身，那就值得。”
然后，谢顿以响亮而坚定的声音说：“借过一下，好吗？”
前排一名男子向前走来。他与身高一米七三的谢顿不相上下，但肩膀比谢顿更宽，而且肌肉更结实。不过谢顿注意到他的腰部有点松垮。
“我叫玛隆，”他以自大自满的口气说，仿佛这个名字具有某种意义。“我在这里是要告诉你，我们不喜欢外星人士进我们的地盘。你想要进来，可以——但是如果你要出去，你就得付出代价。”
“很好，多少？”
“你身上所有的财产。你们阔气的外星人士都有信用磁卡，对吧？把它们通通交出来。”
“不行。”
“由不得你说不行，我们自己会动手。”
“除非将我打伤或杀掉，否则你休想得到。而且它们必须配合我的声纹，我的正常声纹。”
“并非如此，老爷——看，我很有礼貌。我们可以从你身上取走，却不必把你伤得太重。”
“需要多少你们这些粗壮汉子？九个？不，”谢顿很快数了一遍，“十个。”
“就一个，我。”
“没有帮手？”
“就我一个。”
“如果其他人能闪开，腾出点地方，我倒愿意看看你要怎么办。”
“你没有刀子，老爷，你要一把吗？”
“不，你用你的，这样打斗才算公半，我要赤手空拳和你打。”
玛隆环顾一下其他人：“嘿，这小个子真有种。听他的口气甚至不害怕，可真不简单。打伤他简直没面子——我告诉你怎么办，老爷，我要对付这姑娘，如果你要我停手，就把你和她的信用磁卡一块交出来，再用你们的正确声音启动。如果你说不，那么等我收拾完这姑娘……那可要点时间，”他放声大笑，“我就不得不伤害你。”
“不，”谢顿说，“让他走。我已经向你挑战——-对，你用刀子，我不用。如果你想掌握匹夫的胜算，我一个跟你们两个打，可是得先让她离开。”
“别说了，哈里！”铎丝叫道，“如果他要我，就让他过来抓我。你就待在那儿别动。”
“你听到了吗？”玛隆咧嘴大笑，“‘你就待在那儿别动。’我说这小妮子想要我。你们两个，把他看牢。”
谢顿的双臂立即像被两道铁箍紧紧锁住，他还感到背后抵着刀尖。
“不要动。”谢顿耳际传来厉声的耳语，“你可以看着。那女的也许会喜欢，玛隆这方面很高明。”
铎丝再度叫道：“别动，哈里！”说完，她转身警觉地直对玛隆，半握的双手挨近腰际的皮带。
他不怀好意地向她凑近，她则不动声色。等到他来到一臂之遥，她的双臂陡然一闪，玛隆蓦地发现眼前出现两把大刀。
他猛然向后一仰，随后哈哈大笑：“这小妮子有两把刀——像是大男生用的那种。而我却只有一把，不过这够公平了。”他把刀子迅速亮出来，“我可不愿意失手砍伤你，小妮子，因为要是不那么做，我们两个都会获得更多乐趣。也许我可以只把它们从你手上敲掉，啊？”
铎丝说：“我不想杀你，我将尽可能避免那样做。话说回来，我要求大家做个见证，如果我真杀了你，那是为了保护我的朋友，我责无旁贷。”
玛隆装出害怕的样子：“喔，请别杀我，小妮子。”说完他忽然哈哈大笑，在场的达尔人也跟着笑起来。
玛隆举刀向前刺出，落点距离铎丝相当远。接着他又试了第二次、第三次，但铎丝始终一动不动。对于并非真正瞄准她的攻击，她根本不曾试图抵挡。
玛隆的表情变得阴沉，他本想让她表现出惊慌失措的样子，不料只是使自已显得徒劳无功。于是，他下一次攻击直指铎丝。铎丝的左手刀立即闪电般挥出，猛力迎向他的武器，将他的手臂震开。她的右手刀则迅疾内转，在他的短衫上划出一道对角线。短衫下长满黑色胸毛的皮肤，立时绽出一条细微的血痕。
玛隆在震撼中低头单向自己，围观的人则在惊讶中喘不过气来。谢倾觉得抓着自已的两个人手劲放松了点；这场决斗并未完全按照他们的预期进行，他们的注意力全被引了过去。谢顿暗自蓄势待发。
玛隆再度举刀进攻，同时左手朝铎丝的右腕抓去。铎丝的左手刀再度挡住他的利刃，令它动弹不得；她的右手做了一个敏捷的回旋，在玛隆的左手挨近的当儿向下一沉。结果，除了刀刃之外他什么也没抓到，当他张开手的时候，手掌上赫然出现一道血痕。
铎丝随即向后跳开。玛隆在发觉胸部与手掌挂彩后，闷声咆哮道：“再扔把刀给我！”
一阵迟疑之后，一名旁观者将自己的刀偷偷掷出。玛隆正要伸手去接，铎丝的反应却比他更快。她的右手刀击向那把掷出的利刃，将它原路送回，那把刀一面飞还一面打转。
谢顿感到两只手臂上的抓力变得更弱。他突然举起双臂，向上往前一推，立时挣脱。抓他的两个人惊叫一声，转身面对着他，但他迅速以膝头踢向其中一人的腹股沟，并用手肘击向另一人的腹部，两人随即应声倒地。
他跪下去拔取那两人身上的佩刀，起身之后，他就成了像铎丝样的双刀客。
然而与铎丝不同的是，谢顿不懂如何使用这种武器。但他知道那此达尔人不会发觉这点。
铎丝说：“别让他们靠近就行，哈里，还不要攻击。玛隆，我的下一击将不只是皮肉伤。”
玛隆陷入极度的愤怒，一面发出毫无意义的咆哮。一面展开盲目的攻击，试图想以蛮力压倒对手。铎丝微一蹲身，向侧面踏出一步，低头避开他的右臂，同时在他的右脚踝踢了一记。玛降立刻瘫倒在地，手中的刀飞了出去。
然后她跪在地上，将刀架在他的后颈，另一把抵住他的喉头，说：“投降！”
玛隆大吼一声，猛力用手臂将她推开，挣扎着要站起来。
当她再度逼近时，他尚未完全站稳。只见一把刀向下砍去，他的八字胡马上被削去一节。这次他像一头重伤的巨兽般发出哀号，一把按住了脸部。当他将手拿开时，那只手上淌满鲜血。
铎丝喊道：“它不会再长出来了，玛隆，有一片嘴唇跟它一起飞了。敢再做一次攻击，你就是一具死尸。”
她严阵以待，但玛隆已经受够了。他一面呻吟，一面跌跌撞撞地逃开，沿途留下一条血迹。
铎丝转身面向其他人。被谢顿打倒的那两个仍躺在那里，他们已被缴械，并末急着想爬起来。她弯下腰，用一把刀将他们的皮带切断，又将他们的裤子划开。
“这样一来，你们就得提着裤子走路。”她说。
她瞪着仍站在原处的七个人，他们都以敬畏的眼神出神地望着她。“刚才扔刀子的是你们哪一个？”
众人一片沉默。
她又说：“对我而言没有差别。一个一个来或一起上都行，可是我每砍一刀，就会有一个人丧命。”
七个人不约而同立即转身，拔腿就逃。
铎丝扬起眉毛，对谢顿说：“至少这一次，夫铭不能责怪我未尽到保护你的责任。”
谢顿说：“我仍然无法相信我见到的一切。我一直不知道你有这种能耐——或是能说这样的话。”
铎丝只是微微一笑：“你也有你的本事，我们是一对好搭档。来，收起你手中的刀子，放进袋囊中吧。我想消息会迅速传开，我们可以顺利离开脐眼，不必担心再被拦住去路。”
她说得相当正确。
Chapter 72
Both Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili had taken rather lingering baths, making use of the somewhat primitive facilities available to them in the Tisalver household. They had changed their clothing and were in Seldons room when Jirad Tisalver returned in the evening. His signal at the door was (or seemed) rather timid. The buzz did not last long.
Seldon opened the door and said pleasantly, "Good evening, Master Tisalver. And Mistress."
She was standing right behind her husband, forehead puckered into a puzzled frown.
Tisalver said tentatively, as though he was unsure of the situation, "Are you and Mistress Venabili both well?" He nodded his head as though trying to elicit an affirmative by body language.
"Quite well. In and out of Billibotton without trouble and were all washed and changed. Theres no smell left." Seldon lifted his chin as he said it, smiling, tossing the sentence over Tisalvers shoulder to his wife. She sniffed loudly, as though testing the matter.
Still tentatively, Tisalver said, "I understand there was a knife fight."
Seldon raised his eyebrows. "Is that the story?"
"You and the Mistress against a hundred thugs, we were cold, and you killed them all. Is that so?" There was the reluctant sound of deep respect in his voice.
"Absolutely not," Dors put in with sudden annoyance. "Thats ridiculous. What do you think we are? Mass murderers? And do you think a hundred thugs would remain in place, waiting the considerable time it would take me--us--to kill them all? I mean, think about it."
"Thats what theyre saying," said Casilia Tisalver with shrill firmness. "We cant have that sort of thing in this house."
"In the first place," said Seldon, "it wasnt in this house. In the second, it wasnt a hundred men, it was ten. In the third, no one was killed. There was some altercation back and forth, after which they left and made way for us."
"They just made way. Do you expect me to believe that, Outworlders?" demanded Mistress Tisalver belligerently.
Seldon sighed. At the slightest stress, human beings seemed to divide themselves into antagonistic groups. He said, "Well, I grant you one of them was cut a little. Not seriously."
"And you werent hurt at all?" said Tisalver. The admiration in his voice was more marked.
"Not a scratch," said Seldon. "Mistress Venabili handles two knives excellently well."
"I dare say," said Mistress Tisalver, her eyes dropping to Dorss belt, "and thats not what I want to have going on here." Dors said sternly, "As long as no one attacks us here, thats what you wont have here."
"But on account of you," said Mistress Tisalver, "we have trash from the street standing at the doorway."
"My love," said Tisalver soothingly, "let us not anger--"
"Why?" spat his wife with contempt. "Are you afraid of her knives? I would like to see her use them here."
"I have no intention of using them here," said Dors with a sniff as loud as any that Mistress Tisalver had produced. "What is this trash from the street youre talking about?"
Tisalver said, "What my wife means is that an urchin from Billibotton--at least, judging by his appearance--wishes to see you and we are not accustomed to that sort of thing in this neighborhood. It undermines our standing." He sounded apologetic.
Seldon said, "Well, Master Tisalver, well go outside, find out what its all about, and send him on his business as quickly--"
"No. Wait," said Dors, annoyed. "These are our rooms. We pay for them. We decide who visits us and who does not. If there is a young man outside from Billibotton, he is nonetheless a Dahlite. More important, hes a Trantorian. Still more important, hes a citizen of the Empire and a human being. Most important, by asking to see us, he becomes our guest. Therefore, we invite him in to see us."
Mistress Tisalver didnt move. Tisalver himself seemed uncertain.
Dors said, "Since you say I killed a hundred bullies in Billibotton, you surely do not think I am afraid of a boy or, for that matter, of you two." Her right hand dropped casually to her belt.
Tisalver said with sudden energy, "Mistress Venabili, we do not intend to offend you. Of course these rooms are yours and you can entertain whomever you wish here." He stepped back, pulling his indignant wife with him, undergoing a burst of resolution for which he might conceivably have to pay afterward. Dors looked after them sternly.
Seldon smiled dryly. "How unlike you, Dors. I thought I was the one who quixotically got into trouble and that you were the calm and practical one whose only aim was to prevent trouble."
Dors shook her head. "I cant bear to hear a human being spoken of with contempt just because of his group identification--even by other human beings. Its these respectable people here who create those hooligans out there."
"And other respectable people," said Seldon, "who create these respectable people. These mutual animosities are as much a part of humanity--"
"Then youll have to deal with it in your psychohistory, wont you?"
"Most certainly--if there is ever a psychohistory with which to deal with anything at all.--Ah, here comes the urchin under discussion. And its Raych, which somehow doesnt surprise me."
第七十二章
第十五部 地下组织
达凡：……在第一银河帝国最后数世纪的不安岁月中，典型的动荡根源来自政治与军事领袖谋取“至高无上”权力的事实（平均每隔十年，这种至上的权力就会贬值一次）。
在心理史学出现之前，能够称为群众运动的事例少之又少。就此而论，其中一个耐人寻味的例子与达凡有关。此人的真实背景鲜为人知，但他可能曾遇见过哈里•谢顿，当时谢顿……
——《银河百科全书》


第七十二章
利用堤沙佛家现成的、有几分原始的沐浴没备，哈里•谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里双双洗了一个不算短的澡。当吉拉德•堤沙佛傍晚回到家的时候，他们两人已经换好衣服，一起待在谢顿的房间。堤沙佛发出的叫门信号（似乎）有些胆怯，蜂呜声没有持续多久。
谢顿打开门，愉快地说道：“晚安，堤沙佛老爷，还有夫人。”
她站在丈夫的正后方，前额皱成一团，显得十分疑惑。
堤沙佛仿佛不确定情况如何，他以试探性的口吻说：“你和凡纳比里夫人都好吧？”说完他点了点头，似乎想借身体语言引出肯定的答案。
“相当好。进出脐眼都毫无闲难，现在我们都已洗过澡，换过衣服，没有留下任何气味。”谢顿一面说，一面抬起下巴，面露微笑，让这些话越过堤沙佛的肩头抵达他的妻子面前。
她猛吸了几口气，像是在检验这点。
堤沙佛仍旧以试探性的几吻说：“我晓得曾经发生过一场刀战。”
谢顿扬起眉毛：“传闻是这样的吗？”
“我们听说，你和夫人对抗一百名凶徒，将他们全部杀掉。是不是这样？”他的声音透出一种控制不住的深度敬意。
“绝无此事，”铎丝插嘴道，她突然觉得很不耐烦，“那实在荒唐。你以为我们是什么？大屠杀的刽子手？你以为一百名凶徒会待在原地，等上好长一段时间，好让我——我们——把他们通通杀光？我的意思是，用脑筋想想。”
“他们都是这么说的。”卡西莉娅•堤沙佛以尖锐而坚定的口吻说：“我们不能让这种事发生在这栋房子里。”
“第一，”谢顿说，“它不是发生在这栋房子里。第二，没有一百个人，其实只有十个。第三，没有任何人被杀。当时的确发生些口角，然后对方就让路了。”
“他们就这么让路？你们期望我相信这种事吗，两位外星人士？”堤沙佛夫人咄咄逼人地追问。
谢顿叹了一口气。即使在最轻微的压力下，人类似乎也会分裂成敌对的集团。
他说：“好吧，我承认，他们其中一人被割伤了一点，并不严重。”
“而你们完全没受伤？”堤沙佛说，声音中的敬佩之意更加显著。
“毫发无损，”谢顿说，“凡纳比里夫人舞弄双刀的功夫好极了。”
“我就说嘛，”堤沙佛夫人的眼光落到铎丝的皮带上，“那不是我希望会在这里发生的事。”
铎丝断然地说：“只要没有人在这里攻击我们，你这里就不会发生那种事。”
“可是由于你们的缘故，”堤沙佛夫人又说，“我们家门口站了一个街上的废物。”
“亲爱的，”堤沙佛以安抚的口吻说，“别生气……”
“为什么？”他的妻子轻蔑地啐了一口，“你怕她的双刀吗？我倒想看看她在这里怎么耍。”
“我根本不打算在这里动刀。”铎丝哼了一声，与堤沙佛夫人刚才的哼声同样响亮，“你所谓街上的废物究竟是怎么回事？”
堤沙佛说：“我太太指的是一个来自脐眼的小鬼——至少，根据他的外表判断是这样的。他希望见你们，而我们这个小区对这种事并不习惯，这样有损我们的声誉。”他的话听来有些歉然。
谢顿说：“好吧，堤沙佛夫人，我们这就到外面去，弄明白到底是怎么回事，尽快把他打发走——”
“不，慢着。”铎丝说，她显然被惹恼了，“这里是我们的房间，我们付钱租下来的。应该由我们决定谁能而谁不能拜访我们。如果外面是个来自脐眼的年轻人，他无论如何也是个达尔人，更重要的是，他是个川陀人，更加重要的是，他是个帝国公民，是人类的一分子，而最重要的是，既然他要求见我们，他就是我们的客人。因此，我们要请他进来和我们见面。”
堤沙佛夫人没有任何反应，堤沙佛本人似乎不知如何是好。
铎丝义说：“既然你说我在脐眼杀了一百个土霸，你当然不会认为我会怕一个男孩，或者怕你们两位。”她的右手似乎不经意地落在皮带上。
堤沙佛突然中气十足地说：“凡纳比里大人，我们不打算冒犯你。这两间房当然是属于你们的，你们可以在这里招待任何希望招待的人。”在突如其来的一股决心驱使下，他开始向后退去，拉着气呼呼的妻子一同离开，虽然可以想见事后他将为此付出代价。
铎丝以严厉的眼光目送他们。
谢顿无奈地笑了笑：“这真不像你，铎丝。我一直以为，我才是那个满脑子狂想、专门惹是生非的人；而你则是那个冷静务实的人，总是尽可能省掉麻烦。”
铎丝摇了摇头：“一个人只因为他的出身背景，就受到他人——其他的人类如此轻视，我听到这种话便无法忍受。就是这里这些有头有脸的人，制造出那里那些不良少年。”
“而其他一批有头有脸的人，”谢顿说，“则制造出这里这批有头有脸的人。这些相互憎恨同样是人性的一部分……”
“那么，你得在你的心理史学中处理这一点，对不对？”
“一定会，只要真有一种心理史学能处理所自有问题——啊，我们谈论的那个小鬼来啦，是芮奇——这点我倒不惊讶。”
Chapter 73

Raych entered, looking about, clearly intimidated. The forefinger of his right hand reached for his upper lip as though wondering when he would begin to feel the first downy hairs there.
He turned to the clearly outraged Mistress Tisalver and bowed clumsily. "Thank ya, Missus. Ya got a lovely place."
Then, as the door slammed behind him, he turned to Seldon and Dors with an air of easy connoisseurship. "Nice place, guys."
"Im glad you like it," said Seldon solemnly. "How did you know we were here?"
"Followed ya. Howd ya think? Hey, lady"--he turned to Dors--"you dont fight like no dame."
"Have you watched many dames fight?" asked Dors, amused.
Raych rubbed his nose, "No, never seen none whatever. They dont carry knives, except little ones to scare kids with. Never scared me."
"Im sure they didnt. What do you do to make dames draw their knives?"
"Nothin. You just kid around a little. You holler, Hey, lady, lemme-- " He thought about it for a moment and said, "Nothin."
Dors said, "Well, dont try that on me."
"Ya kiddin? After what ya did to Marron? Hey, lady, whered you learn to fight that way?"
"On my own world."
"Could ya teach me?"
"Is that what you came here to see me about?"
"Akchaly, no. I came to bring ya a kind of message."
"From someone who wants to fight me?"
"No one wants to fight ya, lady. Listen, lady, ya got a reputation now. Everybody knows ya. You just walk down anywhere in old Billibotton and all the guys will step aside and let ya pass and grin and make sure they dont look cross-eyed at ya. Oh, lady, ya got it made. Thats why he wants to see ya."
Seldon said, "Raych, just exactly who wants to see us?"
"Guy called Davan."
"And who is he?"
"Just a guy. He lives in Billibotton and dont carry no knife."
"And he stays alive, Raych?"
"He reads a lot and he helps the guys there when they get in trouble with the govment. They kinda leave him alone. He dont need no knife."
"Why didnt he come himself, then?" said Dors. "Why did he send you?"
"He dont like this place. He says it makes him sick. He says all the people here, they lick the govments--" He paused, looked dubiously at the two Outworlders, and said, "Anyway, he wont come here. He said theyd let me in cause I was only a kid." He grinned. "They almost didnt, did they? I mean that lady there who looked like she was smellin somethin?" He stopped suddenly, abashed, and looked down at himself. "Ya dont get much chance to wash where I come from."
"Its all right," said Dors, smiling. "Where are we supposed to meet, then, if he wont come here? After all--if you dont mind--we dont feel like going to Billibotton."
"I told ya," said Raych indignantly. "Ya get free run of Billibotton, I swear. Besides, where he lives no one will bother ya."
"Where is it?" asked Seldon.
"I can take ya there. It aint far."
"And why does he want to see us?" asked Dors.
"Dunno. But he says like this--" Raych half-closed his eyes in an effort to remember. " Tell them I wanna see the man who talked to a Dahlite heatsinker like he was a human being and the woman who beat Marron with knives and didnt kill him when she mighta done so. I think I got it right."
Seldon smiled. "I think you did. Is he ready for us now?"
"Hes waiting."
"Then well come with you." He looked at Dors with a trace of doubt in his eyes.
She said, "All right. Im willing. Perhaps it wont be a trap of some sort. Hope springs eternal--"
第七十三章
　　芮奇一面走进来，一面东张西望，显然事先受过威吓。他的右手食指摸着上唇，仿佛在想不知何时会摸到该处冒出的第一撮细毛。
他转身面向显然气急败坏的堤沙佛夫人，以笨拙的动作鞠了一躬说：“谢谢你，姑奶奶，你有幢可爱的房子。”
房门在他身后“砰”地一声关上之后，他转过来面对谢顿与铎丝，以鉴赏家般的轻松口气说：“好地方，哥儿们。”
“很高兴你会喜欢，”谢顿严肃地说．“你怎么知道我们在这里？”
“跟踪你们，不然你以为呢？嘿，大姐，”他转向铎丝，“你的刀法不像个娘儿们。”
“你看过许多娘儿们斗刀吗？”铎丝打趣道。
芮奇摸了摸鼻子：“不，没见过。她们不带刀子，只带专门吓小孩的小刀，从来吓不倒我。”
“我确信她们办不到。你做了什么事，会让那些娘儿们拔出刀来？”
“啥也没……只是开个小玩笑，只是喊：‘嘿，大姐，让我……”’他想了一下子，又说：“啥也没做。”
铎丝说：“好吧，可别对我试那一套。”
“开玩笑！在你教训了玛隆一顿之后？嘿，大姐，你在哪里学的那种刀法？”
“在我自己的世界。”
“你能教我吗？”
“这就是你来这里见我的原因？”
“老实说，不是。我来是给你们捎个信。”
“哪个想跟我斗刀的人派你来的？”
“没人想和你斗刀，大姐。听我说，大姐，你现在大有名气，每个人都知道你。你老在脐眼随便走到哪儿，哥儿们都会闪到一旁让你通过，咧嘴微笑，以保证他们没用斗鸡眼瞧你。噢，大姐，你做到了，这就是他要见你们的原因。”
谢顿说：“芮奇，到底是谁要见我们？”
“一个叫达凡的哥儿们。”
“他是什么人？”
“就是个哥儿们。他住在脐眼，他不带刀子。”
“而他能活到现在，芮奇？”
“他读过许多书，哥儿们遇到政府找麻烦时他会帮忙。所以他们不惹他，他就不需要刀子。”
“那么，他为什么不自己来？”铎丝问道，“他为什么要派你来？”
“他不喜欢这个地方，他说这里让他恶心。他说这里的所有人，他们都舔政府的……”他顿了一下，迟疑地望着面前两位外星人士，“反正，他不会来这里。他说他们会让我进来，因为我只是个小孩。”他咧嘴一笑，“他们差点没这样做，对不对？我是说刚才那个大姐，她看来好像闻到什么？”
他突然打住，脸红了起来，又低头看了看自己：“在我住的那个地方，没多少机会洗澡。”
“没关系。”铎丝微笑着说，“既然他不来这里，那么，我们要在哪里见面？毕竟，希望你别介意，我们不太喜欢再去脐眼。”
“我告诉过你，”芮奇气愤地说，“你在脐眼可以自由来去，我发誓。而且，在他住的地方，没人会打扰你。”
“那是在哪里？”谢顿问道。
“我可带你们去，不太远。”
“他为什么要见我们？”铎丝问道。
“不知，但他像这么说——”芮奇眯起眼睛努力回想，…告诉他们，我要见那个和一名达尔热闾工谈过话，把他当人看待的那位男士，以及用双刀打败玛隆，可以杀他却没杀他的那位女士。’我想我背得没错。”
谢顿微微一笑：“我也这么想。他准备好了见我们吗？”
“他正在等。”
“那我们这就跟你去。”他望向铎丝，眼中带着一丝犹疑。
她说：“好吧，我愿意去。也许这不会是什么陷阱。希望总是无处不在……”
Chapter 74

There was a pleasant glow to the evening light when they emerged, a faint violet touch and a pinkish edge to the simulated sunset clouds that were scudding along. Dahl might have complaints of their treatment by the Imperial rulers of Trantor, but surely there was nothing wrong with the weather the computers spun out for them.
Dors said in a low voice, "We seem to be celebrities. No mistake about that."
Seldon brought his eyes down from the supposed sky and was immediately aware of a fair-sized crowd around the apartment house in which the Tisalvers lived. Everyone in the crowd stared at them intently. When it was clear that the two Outworlders had become aware of the attention, a low murmur ran through the crowd, which seemed to be on the point of breaking out into applause.
Dors said, "Now I can see where Mistress Tisalver would find this annoying. I should have been a little more sympathetic."
The crowd was, for the most part, poorly dressed and it was not hard to guess that many of the people were from Billibotton. On impulse, Seldon smiled and raised one hand in a mild greeting that was met with applause. One voice, lost in the safe anonymity of the crowd called out, "Can the lady show us some knife tricks?"
When Dors called back, "No, I only draw in anger," there was instant laughter. One man stepped forward. He was clearly not from Billibotton and bore no obvious mark of being a Dahlite. He had only a small mustache, for one thing, and it was brown, not black. He said, "Marlo Tanto of the Trantorian HV News. Can we have you in focus for a bit for our nightly holocast?"
"No," said Dors shortly. "No interviews."
The newsman did not budge. "I understand you were in a fight with a great many men in Billibotton--and won." He smiled. "Thats news, that is."
"No," said Dors. "We met some men in Billibotton, talked to them, and then moved on. Thats all there is to it and thats all youre going to get."
"Whats your name? You dont sound like a Trantorian."
"I have no name."
"And your friends name?"
"He has no name."
The newsman looked annoyed, "Look, lady. Youre news and Im just trying to do my job."
Raych pulled at Dorss sleeve. She leaned down and listened to his earnest whisper.
She nodded and straightened up again. "I dont think youre a newsman, Mr. Tanto. What I think you are is an Imperial agent trying to make trouble for Dahl. There was no fight and youre trying to manufacture news concerning one as a way of justifying an Imperial expedition into Billibotton. I wouldnt stay here if I were you. I dont think youre very popular with these people."
The crowd had begun to mutter at Dorss first words. They grew louder now and began to drift, slowly and in a menacing way, in the direction of Tanto. He looked nervously around and began to move away.
Dors raised her voice. "Let him go. Dont anyone touch him. Dont give him any excuse to report violence."
And they parted before him.
Raych said, "Aw, lady, you shoulda let them rough him up."
"Bloodthirsty boy," said Dors, "take us to this friend of yours."

第七十四章
　　他们出来的时候，室外的照明正映着傍晚时分的悦人光辉。模拟的黄昏云朵轻快地飞，带着淡淡的紫色，边缘则略呈粉红。川陀的帝国统治者给予达尔人的待遇，也许令他们颇有怨言，然而，计算机为他们选择的天气，却显然没有任何瑕疵。
铎丝压低声音说：“毫无疑问地，我们似乎成了名人。”
谢顿将视线沿着所谓的天空向下移，立刻察觉到堤沙佛家的公寓被一大批群众团团围住。
群众中每一个人都专注地望向他们。当两位外星人士显然察觉人群的关注时，一阵低沉的窃窃私语立刻传遍整个群众，似乎马上要转变成鼓掌与喝彩。
铎丝说：“现在我能了解堤沙佛夫人为何感到心烦，我应该更体谅她一点。”
大部分群众的穿着都不怎么体面，不难猜到其中有许多人来自脐眼。
由于一时兴起，谢顿露出微笑，并举起一只手微微打了个招呼，结果换来一阵喝彩。有人躲在人群中叫道：“这位小姐能否表演几招刀法？”
铎丝高声回答：“不行，我只有生气时才拔刀。”立刻换来一阵笑声。
一名男子向前走来，他显然并非来自脐眼，也没有达尔人的明显特征。原因之一是他只有两撇小胡子，而且是棕色而不是黑色。他说：“我是川陀全息新闻的马洛•唐图。我们能否请您稍微对准镜头，接受我们晚间全息新闻的访问？”
“不行，”铎丝断然答道，“不接受访问。”
那位记者毫不放松：“我了解您在脐眼曾与多名男子有过一场恶战——并且赢得胜利。”他微微一笑，“那是新闻，绝对没错。”
“不，”铎丝说，“我们在脐眼遇到一些男的，跟他们谈了几句，然后便继续赶路。事情的经过就是这样，这就是你的采访结果。”
“您尊姓大名？听您的口音不像川陀人。”
“我没有名字。”
“那您的朋友尊姓大名？”
“他也没有名字。”
新闻记者看来恼了。“听好，小姐。你是个新闻，而我只是在尽力完成我的工作。”
芮奇拉了拉锋丝的衣袖。于是她低下头来，听他一本正经地对她耳语了几句。
她点了点头，重新直起身子：“我认为你并不是记者，唐图先生。我倒认为你是一名帝国特务，正在试图给达尔找麻烦。根本没有打斗，你却试图制造这样的新闻，好为帝国征讨脐眼找到合理借口。我要是你的话，就不会待在这里，我不认为你在这些人之间多么受欢迎。”
铎丝在说第一句的时候，群众就开始交头接耳。现在他们的声音变得更大，而且开始以一种具有威胁性的方式，慢慢地朝唐图的方向移动。他紧张兮兮地四下望了望，然后拔腿就走。
铎丝提高音量说：“让他走，任何人都不要碰他。别让他有告发暴力行动的任何借口。”
于是众人为他计出一条路来。
芮奇说：“噢，大姐，你该让他们教训他一顿。”
“嗜血的小子，”锌丝说，“带我们去见你的那个朋友。”
Chapter 75

They met the man who called himself Davan in a room behind a dilapidated diner.
Far behind.
Raych led the way, once more showing himself as much at home in the burrows of Billibotton as a mole would be in tunnels underground in Helicon. It was Dors Venabili whose caution first manifested itself.
She stopped and said, "Come back, Raych. Exactly where are we going?"
"To Davan," said Raych, looking exasperated. "I told ya."
"But this is a deserted area. Theres no one living here." Dors looked about with obvious distaste. The surroundings were lifeless and what light panels there were did not glower [but] did so only dimly.
"Its the way Davan likes it," said Raych. "Hes always changing around, staying here, staying there. Ya know ... changing around."
"Why?" demanded Dors.
"Its safer, lady."
"From whom?"
"From the govment."
"Why would the government want Davan?"
"I dunno, lady. Tell ya what. Ill tell ya where he is and tell ya how to go and ya go on alone--if ya dont want me to take ya."
Seldon said, "No, Raych, Im pretty sure well get lost without you. In fact, you had better wait till were through so you can lead us back."
Raych said at once, "Whats in it fme? Ya expect me to hang around when I get hungry?"
"You hang around and get hungry, Raych, and Ill buy you a big dinner. Anything you like."
"Ya say that now. Mister. How do I know?"
Dorss hand flashed and it was holding a knife, blade exposed, "Youre not calling us liars, are you, Raych?"
Raychs eyes opened wide. He did not seem frightened by the threat. He said, "Hey, I didnt see that. Do it again."
"Ill do it afterward--if youre still here. Otherwise"--Dors glared at him--"well track you down."
"Aw, lady, come on," said Raych. "Ya aint gonna track me down. Ya aint that kind. But Ill be here." He struck a pose. "Ya got my word." And he led them onward in silence, though the sound of their shoes was hollow in the empty corridors.
Davan looked up when they entered, a wild look that softened when he saw Raych.
He gestured quickly toward the two others--questioningly.
Raych said, "These are the guys." And, grinning, he left.
Seldon said, "I am Hari Seldon. The young lady is Dors Venabili." He regarded Davan curiously. Davan was swarthy and had the thick black mustache of the Dahlite male, but in addition he had a stubble of beard. He was the first Dahlite whom Seldon had seen who had not been meticulously shaven. Even the bullies of Billibotton had been smooth of cheek and chin. Seldon said, "What is your name, sir?"
"Davan. Raych must have told you."
"Your second name."
"I am only Davan. Were you followed here, Master Seldon?"
"No, Im sure we werent. If we had, then by sound or sight, I expect Raych would have known. And if he had not, Mistress Venabili would have."
Dors smiled slightly. "You have faith in me, Hari."
"More all the time," he said thoughtfully.
Davan stirred uneasily. "Yet youve already been found."
"Found?"
"Yes, I have heard of this supposed newsman."
"Already?" Seldon looked faintly surprised. "But I suspect he really was a newsman ... and harmless. We tatted him an Imperial agent at Raychs suggestion, which was a good idea. The surrounding crowd grew threatening and we got rid of him."
"No," said Davan, "he was what you called him. My people know the man and he does work for the Empire.--But then you do not do as I do. You do not use a false name and change your place of abode. You go under your own names, making no effort to remain undercover. You are Hari Seldon, the mathematician."
"Yes, I am," said Seldon. "Why should I invent a false name?"
"The Empire wants you, does it not?"
Seldon shrugged. "I stay in places where the Empire cannot reach out to take me."
"Not openly, but the Empire doesnt have to work openly. I would urge you to disappear ... really disappear."
"Like you ... as you say," said Seldon looking about with an edge of distaste. The room was as dead as the corridors he had walked through. It was musty through and through and it was overwhelmingly depressing.
"Yes," said Davan. "You could be useful to us."
"In what way?"
"You talked to a young man named Yugo Amaryl."
"Yes, I did."
"Amaryl tells me that you can predict the future."
Seldon sighed heavily. He was tired of standing in this empty room. Davan was sitting on a cushion and there were other cushions available, but they did not look clean. Nor did he wish to lean against the mildew-streaked wall.
He said, "Either you misunderstood Amaryl or Amaryl misunderstood me. What I have done is to prove that it is possible to choose starting conditions from which historical forecasting does not descend into chaotic conditions, but can become predictable within limits. However, what those starting conditions might be I do not know, nor am I sure that those conditions can be found by any one person--or by any number of people--in a finite length of time. Do you understand me?"
"No."
Seldon sighed again. "Then let me try once more. It is possible to predict the future, but it may be impossible to find out how to take advantage of that possibility. Do you understand?"
Davan looked at Seldon darkly, then at Dors. "Then you cant predict the future."
"Now you have the point, Master Davan."
"Just call me Davan. But you may be able to learn to predict the future someday."
"That is conceivable."
"Then thats why the Empire wants you."
"No," Seldon raised his finger didactically. "Its my idea that that is why the Empire is not making an overwhelming effort to get me. They might like to have me if I can be picked up without trouble, but they know that right now I know nothing and that it is therefore not worth upsetting the delicate peace of Trantor by interfering with the local rights of this sector or that. Thats the reason I can move about under my own name with reasonable security."
For a moment, Davan buried his head in his hands and muttered, "This is madness." Then he looked up wearily and said to Dors, "Are you Master Seldons wife?"
Dors said calmly, "I am his friend and protector."
"How well do you know him?"
"We have been together for some months."
"No more?"
"No more."
"Would it be your opinion he is speaking the truth?"
"I know he is, but what reason would you have to trust me if you do not trust him? If Hari is, for some reason, lying to you, might I not be lying to you equally in order to support him?"
Davan looked from one to the other helplessly. Then he said, "Would you, in any case, help us?"
"Who are us and in what way do you need help?"
Davan said, "You see the situation here in Dahl. We are oppressed. You must know that and, from your treatment of Yugo Amaryl, I cannot believe you lack sympathy for us."
"We are fully sympathetic."
"And you must know the source of the oppression."
"You are going to tell me that its the Imperial government, I suppose, and I dare say it plays its part. On the other hand, I notice that there is a middle class in Dahl that despises the heatsinkers and a criminal class that terrorizes the rest of the sector."
Davans lips tightened, but he remained unmoved. "Quite true. Quite true. But the Empire encourages it as a matter of principle. Dahl has the potential for making serious trouble. If the heatsinkers should go on strike, Trantor would experience a severe energy shortage almost at once ... with all that that implies. However, Dahls own upper classes will spend money to hire the hoodlums of Billibotton--and of other places--to fight the heatsinkers and break the strike. It has happened before. The Empire allows some Dahlites to prosper--comparatively--in order to convert them into Imperialist lackeys, while it refuses to enforce the arms-control laws effectively enough to weaken the criminal element.
"The Imperial government does this everywhere--and not in Dahl alone. They cant exert force to impose their will, as in the old days when they ruled with brutal directness. Nowadays, Trantor has grown so complex and so easily disturbed that the Imperial forces must keep their hands off--"
"A form of degeneration," said Seldon, remembering Hummins complaints.
"What?" said Davan.
"Nothing," said Seldon. "Go on."
"The Imperial forces must keep their hands off, but they find that they can do much even so. Each sector is encouraged to be suspicious of its neighbors. Within each sector, economic and social classes are encouraged to wage a kind of war with each other. The result is that all over Trantor it is impossible for the people to take united action. Everywhere, the people would rather fight each other than make a common stand against the central tyranny and the Empire rules without having to exert force."
"And what," said Dors, "do you think can be done about it?"
"Ive been trying for years to build a feeling of solidarity among the peoples of Trantor."
"I can only suppose," said Seldon dryly, "that you are finding this an impossibly difficult and largely thankless task."
"You suppose correctly," said Davan, "but the party is growing stronger. Many of our knifers are coming to the realization that knives are best when they are not used on each other. Those who attacked you in the corridors of Billibotton are examples of the unconverted. However, those who support you now, who are ready to defend you against the agent you thought was a newsman, are my people. I live here among them. It is not an attractive way of life, but I am safe here. We have adherents in neighboring sectors and we spread daily."
"But where do we come in?" asked Dors.
"For one thing," said Davan, "both of you are Outworlders, scholars. We need people like you among our leaders. Our greatest strength is drawn from the poor and the uneducated because they suffer the most, but they can lead the least. A person like one of you two is worth a hundred of them."
"Thats an odd estimate from someone who wishes to rescue the oppressed," said Seldon.
"I dont mean as people," said Davan hastily. "I mean as far as leadership is concerned. The party must have among its leaders men and women of intellectual power."
"People like us, you mean, are needed to give your party a veneer of respectability."
Davan said, "You can always put something noble in a sneering fashion if you try. But you, Master Seldon, are more than respectable, more than intellectual. Even if you wont admit to being able to penetrate the mists of the future--"
"Please, Davan," said Seldon, "dont be poetic and dont use the conditional. Its not a matter of admitting. I cant foresee the future. Those are not mists that block the view but chrome steel barriers."
"Let me finish. Even if you cant actually predict with--what do you call it?--psychohistorical accuracy, youve studied history and you may have a certain intuitive feeling for consequences. Now, isnt that so?"
Seldon shook his head. "I may have a certain intuitive understanding for mathematical likelihood, but how far I can translate that into anything of historical significance is quite uncertain. Actually, I have not studied history. I wish I had. I feel the loss keenly."
Dors said evenly, "I am the historian, Davan, and I can say a few things if you wish."
"Please do," said Davan, making it half a courtesy, half a challenge.
"For one thing, there have been many revolutions in Galactic history that have overthrown tyrannies, sometimes on individual planets, sometimes in groups of them, occasionally in the Empire itself or in the pre-Imperial regional governments. Often, this has only meant a change in tyranny. In other words, one ruling class is replaced by another--sometimes by one that is more efficient and therefore still more capable of maintaining itself--while the poor and downtrodden remain poor and downtrodden or become even worse off."
Davan, listening intently, said, "Im aware of that. We all are. Perhaps we can learn from the past and know better what to avoid. Besides, the tyranny that now exists is actual. That which may exist in the future is merely potential. If we are always to draw back from change with the thought that the change may be for the worse, then there is no hope at all of ever escaping injustice."
Dors said, "A second point you must remember is that even if you have right on your side, even if justice thunders condemnation, it is usually the tyranny in existence that has the balance of force on its side. There is nothing your knife handlers can do in the way of rioting and demonstrating that will have any permanent effect as long as, in the extremity, there is an army equipped with kinetic, chemical, and neurological weapons that is willing to use them against your people. You can get all the downtrodden and even all the respectables on your side, but you must somehow win over the security forces and the Imperial army or at least seriously weaken their loyalty to the rulers."
Davan said, "Trantor is a multigovernmental world. Each sector has its own rulers and some of them are themselves anti-Imperial. If we can have a strong sector on our side, that would change the situation, would it not? We would then not be merely ragamuffins fighting with knives and stones."
"Does that mean you do have a strong sector on your side or merely that it is your ambition to have one?"
Davan was silent.
Dors said, "I shall assume that you are thinking of the Mayor of Wye. If the Mayor is in the mood to make use of popular discontent as a way of improving the chance of toppling the Emperor, doesnt it strike you that the end the Mayor would have in view would be that of succeeding to the Imperial throne? Why should the Mayor risk his present not-inconsiderable position for anything less? Merely for the blessings of justice and the decent treatment of people, concerning whom he can have little interest?"
"You mean," said Davan, "that any powerful leader who is willing to help us may then betray us."
"It is a situation that is all too common in Galactic history."
"If we are ready for that, might we not betray him?"
"You mean, make use of him and then, at some crucial moment, subvert the leader of his forces--or a leader, at any rate--and have him assassinated?"
"Not perhaps exactly like that, but some way of getting rid of him might exist if that should prove necessary."
"Then we have a revolutionary movement in which the principal players must be ready to betray each other, with each simply waiting for the opportunity. It sounds like a recipe for chaos."
"You will not help us, then?" said Davan.
Seldon, who had been listening to the exchange between Davan and Dors with a puzzled frown on his face, said, "We cant put it that simply. We would like to help you. We are on your side. It seems to me that no sane man wants to uphold an Imperial system that maintains itself by fostering mutual hatred and suspicions. Even when it seems to work, it can only be described as meta-stable; that is, as too apt to fall into instability in one direction or another. But the question is: How can we help? If I had psychohistory, if I could tell what is most likely to happen, or if I could tell what action of a number of alternative possibilities is most likely to bring on an apparently happy consequence, then I would put my abilities at your disposal.--But I dont have it. I can help you best by trying to develop psychohistory."
"And how long will that take?"
Seldon shrugged. "I cannot say."
"How can you ask us to wait indefinitely?"
"What alternative do I have, since I am useless to you as I am? But I will say this: I have until very recently been quite convinced that the development of psychohistory was absolutely impossible. Now I am not so certain of that."
"You mean you have a solution in mind?"
"No, merely an intuitive feeling that a solution might be possible. I have not been able to pin down what has occurred to make me have that feeling. It may be an illusion, but I am trying. Let me continue to try.--Perhaps [then well] meet again."
"Or perhaps," said Davan, "if you return to where you are now staying, you will eventually find yourself in an Imperial trap. You may think that the Empire will leave you alone while you struggle with psychohistory, but I am certain the Emperor and his toady Demerzel are in no mood to wait forever, any more than I am."
"It will do them no good to hasten," said Seldon calmly, "since I am not on their side, as I am on yours.--Come, Dors."
They turned and left Davan, sitting alone in his squalid room, and found Raych waiting for them outside.

第七十五章
　　在一间废弃的快餐店后面——很后面——一个房间里，他们见到那位自称达凡的男子。
芮奇一路带领他们来到此地，再度显示他对脐眼的巷道熟悉无比，就像赫利肯的鼹鼠进了洞穴一样，半路上，铎丝•凡纳比里的警觉首先显现出来。她突然停下脚步，说道：“回来，芮奇。我们究竟要走到哪儿去？”
“去找达凡，”芮奇看来有些火大，“我告诉过你。”
“但这是个荒废的地区，没有任何人住在这里。”铎丝带着明显的嫌恶环顾四周，周遭环境毫无生气，所有的照明板不是暗淡无光，就是只能发出晦暗的光芒。
“达凡就喜欢这样。”芮奇说，“他总是搬来搬去，这里住住，那里住住。你知道……搬来搬去。”
“为什么？”钎丝追问。
“这样比较安全，大姐。”
“躲什么人？”
“躲政府。”
“政府为什么要抓达凡？”
“我不知。这样吧，大姐，我告诉你他在哪里，再告诉你怎么走，然后你们自己去——如果你们不要我带路。”
谢顿说：“不，芮奇，我十分确定我们没有你就会迷路。事实上，你最好等在外面，我们谈完之后你好带我们回来。”
芮奇立刻说：“我会有什么好处？你指望我肚子饿了，还在附近晃来晃去？”
“如果你在附近晃来晃去，晃到肚子饿了，芮奇，我会请你吃一顿丰盛的晚餐，随便你喜欢吃什么。”
“你现在这么说，先生。我又怎么知道是真是假？”
铎丝的手快如闪电，瞬间便拔刀出鞘。“你不是在说我们说谎吧，是不是，芮奇？”
芮奇的双眼睁得老大，他似乎未被这个威胁吓到。他说：“嘿，我没看到，再来一次。”
“事后我会再来一次——假如你还在这里。否则的话，”锋丝以凶狠的耳光瞪着他，“我们会把你揪出来。”
“喔，大姐，得了吧。”芮奇说，“你们不会把我揪出来，你们不是那种人。但我会待在这里，”他摆了个姿势，“我向你们保证。”
然后他就领着两人默默前进，样空旷的回廊中，他们的脚步声显得分外空洞。
他们进入那个房间之后，达凡立刻抬起头来。当他看到芮奇后，凶狂的表情随即转趋柔和，并朝另外两人很快做了一个质问的手势。
芮奇说：“两位哥儿们来啦。”说完他咧嘴一笑，便径自离去。
谢顿说：“我是哈里•谢顿，这位年轻小姐是铎丝•凡纳比里。”
他以好奇的眼光打量达凡。达凡的皮肤黝黑，有着达尔男性独特的粗黑八字胡，但是除此之外，他还蓄着短短的络腮胡。在谢顿见过的达尔男子中，他是第一个不曾仔细刮脸的人。即使是脐眼的那些土霸，他们的脸颊与下巴也是光溜溜的。
谢顿说：“请教你的名字，阁下？”
“达凡。芮奇一定告诉过你。”
“你的姓氏呢？”
“我就叫达凡。你们来这里时曾被跟踪吗，谢顿老爷？”
“不，我确定没有。如果我们遭到跟踪，我相信那些人逃不过芮奇的耳朵和眼睛。即使他未曾察觉，凡纳比里夫人也会发现。”
铎丝微微一笑：“你对我真有信心，哈里。”
“越来越强。”他意味深长地说。
达凡不安地挪动了一下。“但你们已经被发现了。”
“被发现？”
“是的，我听说了这个所谓的新闻记者。”
“那么快？”谢顿看来有点惊讶，“但我以为他真是一名记者……而且并无恶意。是芮奇建议我们叫他帝国特务的，这是个好主意。周围的群众立刻变得凶恶，我们就这样摆脱了他。”
“不，”达凡说，“你没有冤枉他。我的手下认识这个人，他的确为帝国工作。可是你们的行事方式和我不同，你们不用假名，也不经常更换住处。你们用自己的真名行动，并未试图长期藏匿地下。你是哈里•谢顿，一位数学家。”
“没错，我就是。”谢顿说，“我为什么要取个假名字？”
“帝国正在缉捕你，对不对？”
谢顿耸了耸肩：“我所待的那些地方，都是帝国势力不及之处。”
“那仅是就公然行动而言，但帝国不一定非公然行动不可。我奉劝你们销声匿迹……真正消失。”
“就像你……如你所说。”谢顿一面说，一面带着些许嫌恶四下张望。这个房间与他刚才经过的那些回廊一样死气沉沉，到处充满霉味，而且有一种无比阴郁的气氛。
“是的，”达凡说，“你可能对我们有用。”
“如何有用？”
“你跟一位名叫雨果•阿马瑞尔的人谈过话。”
“是的，没错。”
“阿马瑞尔告诉我说你能预测未来。”
谢顿重重叹了一声，他厌倦了站在这个空洞的虏问坐。达儿坐在一个坐垫上，室内还有其他的坐垫，但它们看来并不干净。此外，他也不希望靠在满是霉斑的墙壁上。
他说：“要不是你误会了阿马瑞尔，就是阿马瑞尔误会了我。我所做到的，只是证明有可能选择一组起始条件，从这组条件出发，历史预测不会陷入混沌条件，且能在某个限度内具有可预测性。然而，那组起始条件应该是什么，我根本不知道；我也不确定那些条件是否可在有限时间内，能由任何一个人，或是任何数目的一群人找出来。你了解我的话吗？”
“不了解。”
谢顿又叹了一声，“那么让我再试一次。预测未来是可能的，但或许不可能找出如何利用这个可能件。你了解了吗？”
达儿以阴郁的眼神望向谢顿，然后又望向铎丝：“所以你无法预测未来。”
“现在你总算掌握重点了，达凡老爷。”
“叫我达凡就行。但是也许有一天，你能学到如何预测未来。”
“那倒是可以想象的。”
“所以说，那就是帝国要你的原因。”
“不，”谢顿举起一根手指，像是要说教，“在我看来，这反而是帝国未倾全力捉拿我的原因。若能毫不费力就抓到我，他们或许会想将我带走，但是他们明白，此时此刻我什么也不知道，因此不值得为了我而干预某区的地方政权，以致搅乱川陀上微妙而脆弱的和平。这就是我还能以本名活动，而不至有重大安全威胁的原因。”
一时之间，达凡将头埋在双掌之中，喃喃自语道：“真是愚蠢。”
然后他满面倦容地抬起头来，对铎丝说：“你是谢顿老爷的妻子吗？”
铎丝平静地答道：“我是他的朋友兼保护者。”
“你对他的认识有多深？”
“我们在一起几个月了。”
“如此而已？”
“如此而已。”
“依你的见解，他说的都是实话吗？”
“我知道他说的是实话，但你若是不信任他，又有什么理由该信任我？假如因为某种理由，哈里对你说了谎话，难道我不会为了支持他，而同样对你说谎吗？”
达凡无助地轮流望向对面两人，又说：“无论如何，你们愿意帮助我们吗？”
“‘我们’是指谁？你们又需要什么样的帮助？”
达凡说：“你看到了达尔这里的情形，我们受到压迫，这点你一定知道。根据你对待雨果•阿马瑞尔的方式，我无法相信你对我们毫无同情。”
“我们万分同情。”
“你也一定知道压迫的来源。”
“你是想告诉我就是帝国政府，对吧？我这么想，而我敢说它的确是主要的压迫来源。另一方面，我注意到达尔有个轻视热闾工的中等阶级，还有个令本区各处陷入恐怖的罪犯阶级。”
达儿的嘴唇收紧，但他依旧保持镇定。“正确，相当正确，但原则上帝国鼓励这种趋势。达尔具有引发重大危机的潜力，如果热闾工进行罢工，川陀几乎立刻会遭到严重的能源短缺……以及因此而来的一切灾难。然而，达尔本身的上层阶级会花钱雇用脐眼或其他地方的流氓，去教训那些热闾工，让罢工半途夭折，这种事以前发生过。帝国允许某些达尔人飞黄腾达——当然是相对而言——好将他们收买为帝国主义的走狗；然而，它却拒绝厉行削弱犯罪分子的武器管制法令：帝国政府在每个地方都这样做，并非只在达尔如此。过去那种以凶残手段直接统治的模式已无法派上用场，他们不能利用武力贯彻他们的意志。如今，川陀已经变得如此复杂，如此容易动摇，帝国武力必须保持一定距离——”
“衰微的一种体现。”谢顿想起夫铭的牢骚，随口说了出来。
“什么？”达凡问道。
“没什么，”谢顿说，“请继续。”
“帝国武力必须保持一定距离，不过他们发现即使如此，他们仍旧能动许多手脚。例如鼓励每个区猜疑近邻；而在每一区中，又鼓励各个经济和社会阶级互相进行某种斗争。结果使得川陀每个角落的人民，都不可能采取团结一致的行动。不论在任何地方，人们宁愿互相斗争，也不想对中央极权的专制采取共同市场。这样一来，帝国不费一兵一卒即可统治川陀。”
“在你看来，”铎丝说，“能做些什么来改善这一点？”
“我努力了许多年，试图在川陀人民之间建立一种团结感。”
“我只能这么猜想，”谢顿冷淡地说，“你发现这个工作困难到近乎不可能，而且大多时候吃力不讨好。”
“你的猜想完全正确，”达凡说，“但这个党正在茁壮成长。我们的许多刀客已经渐渐了解，刀子的最佳用途不是用来彼此砍杀。上次在脐眼的回廊中攻击你们的人，是那些不知悔改的例子。然而，现在支持你的邡些人，那些愿意保护你，为你对付那个特务记者的人，他们都是我的人马。我和他们一起住在这里，这并非一种迷人的生活方式，但我在此安全无虞。我们在邻区也有志同道合者，我们的势力正在一天天扩展。”
“可是我们又扮演什么角色呢？”铎丝问道。
“首先，”达凡说，“你们两位都是外星人士，都是学者，我们的领导群需要像你们这样的人。我们最大的力量源自贫困、未受教育的群众，因为他们受的苦难最大，但是他们的领导能力也最差。像你们两位这样的人，一个就抵得上他们一百个。”
“对一位以解救被压迫者为目标的人而言，这是个奇特的估算。”谢顿说。
“我的意思不是指人，”达儿连忙说，“我是仅就领导才能而论。在这个党的领导者中，一定要包括具有知识力量的男女。”
“你的意思是，需要像我们这样的人，好让你的党虚有值得尊敬的外表。”
达凡说：“只要有意，某件高贵的举动总是能被说成一文不值。可是你，谢顿老爷，则不只是值得尊敬，不只是拥有知识，即使你不承认自己有能力看穿未来的迷雾……”
“拜托，达凡，”谢顿说，“别用诗意的语言，也请你别用条件句。这并非承认与否的问题，我实在无法预见未来。遮挡视线的可不是烟雾，而是铬钢制成的壁垒。”
“让我说完。即使你不能以——你管它叫什么来着？喔，心理史学的准确度真正预测未来，但你曾研究过历史，对于事件的结果或许有某种程度的直觉。啊，是不是这样？”
谢顿摇了摇头：“对于数学上的可能性，我或许有些直觉式的了解，但我能将它转换成具有多少史学重要性的东西，答案则相当不确定。事实上，我并未研究过历史。我希望自己曾下过工夫，为此我极为遗憾。”
铎丝以平稳的口吻说：“我是个历史学家，达凡。你要是希望的话，我可以说几句话。”
“请讲。”达凡的口气听来半是客气，半带挑衅。
“首先，在银河历史上，曾发生过许多次推翻专制的革命，有时是在个别的行星，有时是一群行星，偶尔也发生于帝国本身，或是前帝国时代的地方政府中。往往，这只意味着专制的更替。换句话说，一个统治阶级被另一个取代——有时后者比前者更有效率，因此更有能力维系自身的统治。原本贫苦的、受压迫的百姓，依然是贫苦而受压迫的一群，或是处境变得更糟。”
一直专心聆听的达凡说道：“我晓得这种事，我们全都晓得。说不定我们能从过去学到教训，更加了解该如何避免。此外，如今存在的专制是真实的，那个或许存在于未来的却只是潜在的可能。如果我们总是不敢接受改变，认为也许会越变越糟，那根本没希望免除任何的不公不义。”
铎丝说：“第二点你必须记住的，就是即使公理在你这边，即使正义之神发出怒吼与谴责，然而，通常拥有绝对武力优势的都是那个专制政权。只要在情况危急之际，有一支配备动能、化学能和神经武器的军队，愿意用它们对付你的人马，那么你的刀客利用暴动和示威的手段，根本无法造成任何永久性影响。你能使所有受压迫者站在你这边，甚至能吸引所有有头有脸的人，可是你还得设法笼络安全部队和帝国的军队，或者至少得大幅削弱他们肘统治者的忠诚。”
达凡说：“川陀是个多政府的世界，各区都有自身的统治者，他们其中有些也是反帝人士。如果我们让一个强区加入我们这边，那就会改变这种情况，对不对？那个时候，我们就不只是一群手持刀子、石头的褴褛杂牌军。”
“你的意思是，真有一个强区站在你那边，或者只是你有企图拉拢一个？”
达凡沉默不语。
铎丝又说：“我猜你心目中的对象是卫荷区长。如果那位区长有心利用普遍的不满，来增加推翻皇上的成功机会，难道你不曾想到，他所期待的结局，将是由他自己继任皇位。区长现在的地位并非毫不值钱，除了皇位之外，还有什么值得他冒险的？难道只是为了正义的美名，为了帮他并不关心的人民争取良好的待遇？”
“你的意思是，”达凡说道，“任何愿意帮助我们的强权领袖，到时都可能背叛我们？”
“在银河历史上，这种情形屡见不鲜。”
“如果我们有所准备，难道我们不能背叛他吗？”
“你的意思是先利用他，然后在某个关键时刻，策反他的军队领袖——或者，至少是其中之一——将他暗杀？”
“也许不是完全像这样，但若证明有必要的话，总该有什么办法将他除去。”
“那我们就有了这样一场革命行动——其中的主要角色得随时准备彼此背叛，每个人都只是在等待机会。这听来像是制造混乱的配方。”
“这么说，你们不会帮助我们？”达凡说。
谢顿一直皱着眉头，倾听达凡与铎丝的对话，仿佛十分为难。这时他说：“我们不能把话说得那么简单。我们愿意帮助你们，我们站在你们这边。在我看来，没有任何心智健全的人，会想支持一个借着培养互恨、互疑来维持自身的帝制系统。即使现在似乎行得通，它也只能算是暂时稳定状态；也就是说，它太容易向某个方向倾倒，跌入不稳定的状态。不过问题是：我们怎样才能帮忙？假使我掌握了心理史学，假使我能判断什么是最可能发生的，或者，假使我能判断在数个可供选择的行动中，哪个最有可能带来圆满的结局，那么我会听任你支配我的能力——可是我并未掌握。我能帮助你的最好方式，就是试着把心理史学建立起来。”
“这要花多久时间？”
谢顿耸了耸肩：“我不敢说。”
“你怎能让我们无限期等下去？”
“既然我现在对你毫无用处，我还有什么其他选择？不过可以告诉你，不久之前我还一直深信建立心理史学是绝不可能的事，如今我已不再如此确定。”
“你的意思是说。你心中已有解决之道？”
“不，只是有一个直觉，感到某个解决之道或许是可能的。我还未能确知究竟是什么使我有那种感觉。它也许是一种幻觉，但我正在尝试寻找真相。让我继续尝试——说不定我们会再见面。”
“或者说不定——”达凡说，“你回到现在的栖身之地，到头来却发现自己置身于帝国的陷阱中。你也许认为在你和心理史学奋斗时，帝国会暂且放你一马。但我确定皇上和他的马屁精丹莫茨尔，必定和我一样不想永远等下去。”
“轻举妄动对他们没好处，”谢顿冷静地说，“因为我并非站在他们那边，我是站在你们这边的。来吧，铎丝。”
他们转身离去，留下达凡一人独自坐在肮脏的斗室。才出门，他们便发现芮奇还等在外头。
Chapter 76
Raych was eating, licking his fingers, and crumpling the bag in which the food--whatever it was--had been. A strong smell of onions pervaded the air--different somehow, yeast-based perhaps.
Dors, retreating a little from the odor, said, "Where did you get the food from, Raych?"
"Davans guys. They brought it to me. Davans okay."
"Then we dont have to buy you dinner, do we?" said Seldon, conscious of his own empty stomach.
"Ya owe me somethin," said Raych, looking greedily in Dorss direction. "How about the ladys knife? One of em."
"No knife," said Dors. "You get us back safely and Ill give you five credits."
"Cant get no knife for five credits," grumbled Raych.
"Youre not getting anything but five credits," said Dors.
"Youre a lousy dame, lady," said Raych.
"Im a lousy dame with a quick knife, Raych, so get moving."
"All right. Dont get all perspired." Raych waved his hand. "This way."
It was back through the empty corridors, but this time Dors, looking this way and that, stopped. "Hold on, Raych. Were being followed."
Raych looked exasperated. "Ya aint supposed to hear em."
Seldon said, bending his head to one side, "I dont hear anything."
"I do," said Dors. "Now, Raych, I dont want any fooling around. You tell me right now whats going on or Ill rap your head so that you wont see straight for a week. I mean it."
Raych held up one arm defensively. "You try it, you lousy dame. You try it. Its Davans guys. Theyre just taking care of us, in case any knifers come along."
"Davans guys?"
"Yeah. Theyre goin along the service corridors."
Dorss right hand shot out and seized Raych by the scruff of his upper garment. She lifted and he dangled, shouting, "Hey, lady. Hey!"
Seldon said, "Dors! Dont be hard on him."
"Ill be harder still if I think hes lying. Youre my charge, Hari, not he."
"Im not lyin," said Raych, struggling. "Im not."
"Im sure he isnt," said Seldon.
"Well, well see. Raych, tell them to come out where we can see them." She let him drop and dusted her hands.
"Youre some kind of nut, lady," said Raych aggrievedly. Then he raised his voice. "Yay, Davan! Come out here, some of ya guys!"
There was a wait and then, from an unlit opening along the corridor, two dark-mustached men came out, one with a scar running the length of his cheek. Each held the sheath of a knife in his hand, blade withdrawn.
"How many more of you are there?" asked Dors harshly.
"A few," said one of the newcomers. "Orders. Were guarding you. Davan wants you safe."
"Thank you. Try to be even quieter. Raych, keep on moving."
Raych said sulkily, "Ya roughed me up when I was telling the truth."
"Youre right," said Dors. "At least, I think youre right ... and I apologize."
"Im not sure I should accept," said Raych, trying to stand tall. "But awright, just this once." He moved on.
When they reached the walkway, the unseen corps of guards vanished. At least, even Dorss keen ears could hear them no more. By now, though, they were moving into the respectable part of the sector.
Dors said thoughtfully, "I dont think we have clothes that would fit you, Raych."
Raych said, "Why do ya want clothes to fit me, Missus?" (Respectability seemed to invade Raych once they were out of the corridors.) "I got clothes."
"I thought youd like to come into our place and take a bath."
Raych said, "What for? Ill wash one o these days. And Ill put on my other shirt." He looked up at Dors shrewdly. "Youre sorry ya roughed me up. Right? Ya tryin to make up?"
Dors smiled. "Yes. Sort of."
Raych waved a hand in lordly fashion. "Thats all right. Ya didnt hurt. Listen. Youre strong for a lady. Ya lifted me up like I was nothin."
"I was annoyed, Raych. I have to be concerned about Master Seldon."
"Ya sort of his bodyguard?" Raych looked at Seldon inquiringly. "Ya got a lady for a bodyguard?"
"I cant help it," said Seldon smiling wryly. "She insists. And she certainly knows her job."
Dors said, "Think again, Raych. Are you sure you wont have a bath? A nice warm bath."
Raych said, "I got no chance. Ya think that lady is gonna let me in the house again?"
Dors looked up and saw Casilia Tisalver outside the front door of the apartment complex, staring first at the Outworld woman and then at the slum-bred boy. It would have been impossible to tell in which case her expression was angrier.
Raych said, "Well, so long, Mister and Missus. I dont know if shell let either of ya in the house." He placed his hands in his pocket and swaggered off in a fine affectation of carefree indifference.
Seldon said, "Good evening, Mistress Tisalver. Its rather late, isnt it?"
"Its very late," she replied. "There was a near riot today outside this very complex because of that newsman you pushed the street vermin at."
"We didnt push anyone on anyone," said Dors.
"I was there," said Mistress Tisalver intransigently. "I saw it." She stepped aside to let them enter, but delayed long enough to make her reluctance quite plain.
"She acts as though that was the last straw," said Dors as she and Seldon made their way up to their rooms.
"So? What can she do about it?" asked Seldon.
"I wonder," said Dors.
Officers
RAYCH-- ... According to Hari Seldon, the original meeting with Raych was entirely accidental. He was simply a gutter urchin from whom Seldon had asked directions. But his life, from that moment on, continued to be intertwined with that of the great mathematician until ...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第七十六章
　　芮奇正在吃东西，他一面舔着手指，一面将原本不知装着什么食物的袋子捏皱。一种强烈的洋葱气味弥漫在空气中——不过这并不是真的洋葱，也许是发自酵母制成的食物。
铎丝被熏得稍微退了一步：“你的食物是从哪里来的，芮奇？”
“达凡的哥儿们，他们拿给我的，达凡不坏。”
“那我们不必请你吃晚饭了，对不对？”谢顿说完之后，察觉自己的肚子倒是空了。
“你们欠我一点东西，”芮奇一面说，一面贪婪地望向铎丝，“这位大姐的刀子怎么样？分我一把。”
“刀子不行，”铎丝说，“你带我们平安回去，我就给你五个信用点。”
“五个信用点买不到刀子。”芮奇抱怨道。
“除了五个信用点之外，你什么也休想得到。”铎丝说。
“你是个差幼的娘儿们，大姐。”芮奇说。
“我是个拥有快刀的差劲娘儿们，芮奇，所以赶紧走吧。”
“好吧，别太激动。”芮奇挥了挥手，“这边走。”
他们又来到空旷的回廊。不过这一次，铎丝东张西望一番后停下了脚步。“等等，芮奇，有人跟踪我们。”
芮奇看来勃然大怒：“你怎么可能听到他们！”
谢顿将头弯向一侧，说道：“我什么也听不到。”
“我听到了，”铎丝说，“好啦，芮奇，我不希望你耍什么花样。立刻告诉我是怎么回事，否则我就要敲你的头，让你整整一周没法抬头。我是说真的。”
“你试试看，你这个差劲的娘儿们，你试试看。”芮奇举起手臂防御，“那是达凡的哥儿们，他们只是在照应我们，以防路上遇到任何刀客。”
“达凡的哥儿们？”
“是啊，他们沿着工用回廊前进。”
铎丝猛然伸出右手，抓住芮奇颈背处的衣领。她将手一举，他就悬吊在半空中，慌忙喊道：“嘿，大姐。嘿！”
谢顿说：“不要！不要对他动粗。”
“如果我认为他是在说谎，我还会更加粗暴。我保护的对象是你，哈里，不是他。”
“我没说谎，”芮奇拼命挣扎，“我没。”
“我确信他没有。”谢顿说。
“好吧，我们等着瞧。芮奇，叫他们走出来，走到我们看得见的地方。”她松手让他落下，拍了拍手上的灰尘。
“你简直是个傻瓜，大姐。”芮奇愤愤不平地说，然后提高音量喊道：“喂，达凡！你们随便几个哥儿们，走出来！”
等了一会儿，从回廊中一个光线不及的出口处，走出两名留着黑色八字胡的男子，其中一个有一道横贯脸颊的疤。两人手中都握着一把刀鞘，刀刃是缩着的。
“你们还有多少人在那里？”铎丝厉声问道。
“有一些，”其中一人答道，“我们奉命保卫你们，达凡要你们安然无事。”
“谢谢你，试着更安静点。芮奇，继续走。”
芮奇悻悻地说：“我说实话的时候，你却教训我一顿。”
“你说得对，”铎丝说，“至少，我认为你说得对——我郑重道歉。”
“我不确定该不该接受，”芮奇试图抬头挺胸，说道，“不过算了，下次不可以。”说完他就继续前进。
当他们来到人行道后，那些隐匿的卫队便消失了。至少，就连铎丝敏锐的耳朵也无法听见他们的动静。不过，反正他们就要进入本区的高尚地段。
铎丝若有所指地说：“我想我们没有适合你的衣服，芮奇。”
芮奇说：“为什么要适合我的衣服，姑奶奶？我有衣服。”一旦他们走出那些回廊，芮奇似乎也懂得尊重了。
“我原本在想，你会喜欢到我们住的地方洗个澡。”
芮奇说：“为什么？过几天我会洗，然后我会穿上另一件短衫。”他机灵地抬头望向铎丝，“你为了教训我一顿感到抱歉，对吗？你试图补偿。”
铎丝微微一笑：“是的，可以这么说。”
芮奇以气派的动作挥了挥手：“没关系，你没弄痛我。听我说，以大姐来说你非常强壮，你举起我就像我是空气一样。”
“我当时心烦意乱，芮奇，我必须顾虑谢顿老爷。”
“你就像是他的保镖？”芮奇带着询问的神情望向谢顿，“你用个大姐当你的保镖？”
“我也没办法，”谢顿露出一抹苦笑，“她坚持如此，而且她确实很称职。”
铎丝说：“再次谢谢你，芮奇。你确定不要洗个澡吗？一个温暖舒适的澡。”
芮奇说：“我看没机会了。你以为那个大姐会让我再进那栋房子吗？”
铎丝抬起头来，看到卡西莉娅•堤沙佛正站在公寓群的前门外。她先盯着这个外星女子，然后望向那个贫民窟长大的男孩。从她的表情实在很难判断她对何者更愤怒些。
芮奇说：“好啦，告辞了，先生和姑奶奶。不晓得她会不会让你们进屋去。”他将双手放进口袋，装出一副毫不在乎的淡然模样，大摇大摆走开了。
谢顿说：“晚安，堤沙佛夫人。相当晚了，对吧？”
“非常晚了。”她答道，“今天在这个公寓群外，由于你驱使街头无赖对付那名记者，几乎发生一场暴动。”
“我们没有驱使任何人对付任何人。”铎丝说。
“我当时在场，”堤沙佛夫人毫不妥协地说，“我都看见了。”她故意挡在门口，好一会儿才心不甘情不愿地让他们进去。
“看她的反应，那仿佛超过了她忍耐的极限。”当两人走向各自的房间时，铎丝这么说。
“那又如何？她能怎么样？”谢顿问道。
“我在纳闷。”铎丝说。
Chapter 77
The next morning, dressed from the waist down, having washed and shaved, Seldon knocked on the door that led to Dorss adjoining room and said in a moderate voice, "Open the door, Dors."
She did. The short reddish-gold curls of her hair were still wet and she too was dressed only from the waist down.
Seldon stepped back in embarrassed alarm. Dors looked down at the swell of her breasts indifferently and wrapped a towel around her head. "What is it?" she asked.
Seldon said, looking off to his right, "I was going to ask you about Wye."
Dors said very naturally, "About why in connection with what? And for goodness sake, dont make me talk to your ear. Surely, youre not a virgin."
Seldon said in a hurt tone, "I was merely trying to be polite. If you dont mind, I certainly dont. And its not why about what. Im asking about the Wye Sector."
"Why do you want to know? Or, if you prefer: Why Wye?"
"Look, Dors, Im serious. Every once in a while, the Wye Sector is mentioned--the Mayor of Wye, actually. Hummin mentioned him, you did, Davan did. I dont know anything about either the sector or the Mayor."
"Im not a native Trantorian either, Hari. I know very little, but youre welcome to what I do know. Wye is near the south pole--quite large, very populous--"
"Very populous at the south pole?"
"Were not on Helicon, Hari. Or on Cinna either. This is Trantor. Everything is underground and underground at the poles or underground at the equator is pretty much the same. Of course, I imagine they keep their day-night arrangements rather extreme--long days in their summer, long nights in their winter--almost as it would be on the surface. The extremes are just affectation; theyre proud of being polar."
"But Upperside they must be cold, indeed."
"Oh yes. The Wye Upperside is snow and ice, but it doesnt lie as thickly there as you might think. If it did, it might crush the dome, but it doesnt and that is the basic reason for Wyes power."
She turned to her mirror, removed the towel from her head, and threw the dry-net over her hair, which, in a matter of five seconds, gave it a pleasant sheen. She said, "You have no idea how glad I am not to be wearing a skincap," as she put on the upper portion of her clothing.
"What has the ice layer to do with Wyes power?"
"Think about it. Forty billion people use a great deal of power and every calorie of it eventually degenerates into heat and has to be gotten rid of. Its piped to the poles, particularly to the south pole, which is the more developed of the two, and is discharged into space. It [melts] most of the ice in the process and Im sure that accounts for Trantors clouds and rains, no matter how much the meteorology boggins insist that things are more complicated than that."
"Does Wye make use of the power before discharging it?"
"They may, for all I know. I havent the slightest idea, by the way, as to the technology involved in discharging the heat, but Im talking about political power. If Dahl were to stop producing usable energy, that would certainly inconvenience Trantor, but there are other sectors that produce energy and can up their production and, of course, there is stored energy in one form or another. Eventually, Dahl would have to be dealt with, but there would be time. Wye, on the other hand--"
"Yes?"
"Well, Wye gets rid of at least 90 percent of all the heat developed on Trantor and there is no substitute. If Wye were to shut down its heat emission, the temperature would start going up all over Trantor."
"In Wye too."
"[Yes], but since Wye is at the south pole, it can arrange an influx of cold air. It wouldnt do much good, but Wye would last longer than the rest of Trantor. The point is, then, that Wye is a very touchy problem for the Emperor and the Mayor of Wye is--or at least can be--extremely powerful."
"And what kind of a person is the present Mayor of Wye?"
"That I dont know. What Ive occasionally heard would make it seem that he is very old and pretty much a recluse, but hard as a hypership hull and still cleverly maneuvering for power."
"Why, I wonder? If hes that old, he couldnt hold the power for long."
"Who knows, Hari? A lifelong obsession, I suppose. Or else its the game ... the maneuvering for power, without any real longing for the power itself. Probably if he had the power and took over Demerzels place or even the Imperial throne itself, he would feel disappointed because the game would be over. Of course he might, if he was still alive, begin the subsequent game of keeping power, which might be just as difficult and just as satisfying."
Seldon shook his head. "It strikes me that no one could possibly want to be Emperor."
"No sane person would, I [free], but the Imperial wish, as it is frequently called, is like a disease that, when caught, drives out sanity. And the closer you get to high office, the more likely you are to catch the disease. With each ensuing promotion--"
"The disease grows still more acute. Yes, I can see that. But it also seems to me that Trantor is so huge a world, so interlocking in its needs and so conflicting in its ambitions, that it makes up the major part of the inability of the Emperor to rule. Why doesnt he just leave Trantor and establish himself on some simpler world?"
Dors laughed. "You wouldnt ask that if you knew your history. Trantor is the Empire through thousands of years of custom. An Emperor who is not at the Imperial Palace is not the Emperor. He is a place, even more than a person." Seldon sank into silence, his face rigid, and after a while Dors asked, "Whats the matter, Hari?"
"Im thinking," he said in a muffled voice. "Ever since you told me that hand-on-thigh story, Ive had fugitive thoughts that--Now your remark about the Emperor being a place rather than a person seems to have struck a chord."
"What kind of chord?"
Seldon shook his head. "Im still thinking. I may be all wrong." His glance at Dors sharpened, his eyes coming into focus. "In any case, we ought to go down and have breakfast. Were late and I dont think Mistress Tisalver is in a good enough humor to have it brought in for us."
"You optimist," said Dors. "My own feeling is that shes not in a good enough humor to want us to stay--breakfast or not. She wants us out of here."
"That may be, but were paying her."
"Yes, but I suspect she hates us enough by now to scorn our credits."
"Perhaps her husband will feel a bit more affectionate concerning the rent."
"If he has a single word to say, Hari, the only person who would be more surprised than me to hear it would be Mistress Tisalver.--Very well, Im ready."
And they moved down the stairs to the Tisalver portion of the apartment to find the lady in question waiting for them with less than breakfast--and with considerably more too.

第七十七章
第十六部 警官
芮奇：……根据哈里•谢顿的说法，最初与芮奇相遇纯粹是偶然。他只是个贫民区的顽童，谢顿只是向他问路。但从那一刻起，他的人生就与那位大数学家纠缠在一起。
直到……
——《银河百科全书》


第七十七章
第二天早上，谢顿梳洗刮脸完毕，上半身还没套上衣服，就敲着通往隔壁铎丝房间的那扇门，以适度的音量说：“开门，铎丝。”
铎丝应声开门。她满头金里透红的卷曲短发还湿淋淋的，而她的上身同样完全赤裸。
谢顿在尴尬的震惊中忙向后退。铎丝毫不在意地低头看了看圆胀的乳房，拿条毛巾裹在头上。“什么事？”她问。
谢顿将头转向右侧，说道：“我想请教你卫荷的事。”
铎丝毫不忸怩地说：“为何怎么样？还有，看在老天的分上，别让我对着你的耳朵说话。不用说，你当然不是处男。”
谢顿以受挫的语调说：“我只是想表现像个君子。如果你不在意，我自然也不会。还有，我说的不是为何怎么样，我是在问你有关卫荷区的事。”
“为何你想知道？或者你喜欢这么说——为何要问卫荷？”
“听好，铎丝，我不是在开玩笑。每隔一阵子，卫荷区就会被人提起——事实上，是提起那个卫荷区长。夫铭提过他，你提过，达凡也提过。我却对这个区和这个区长都一无所知。”
“我也不是土生土长的川陀人，哈里。我知道得非常少，不过我很乐意和你分享我所知道的一切。卫荷接近南极——面积相当庞大，人口众多……”
“在南极还能人口众多？”
“我们不是在赫利肯，哈里，也不是在锡纳上。这里是川陀，万事万物都在地底，而两极的地底和赤道的地底几乎差不多。当然，我猜想他们会保持相当极端的昼夜分布——在他们的夏天白昼很长，而冬天则刚好相反，几乎和地表的情形一样。这种极端只是装模作样，事实上他们是以身居极地自豪。”
“可是他们的穹顶上一定很冷。”
“噢，没错。卫荷的穹顶上冰雪交加，可是冰层堆积得不如你想象中那么厚，——否则就可能压垮穹顶。冰层就是卫倚握有权力的基本原因。”
她转身面向镜子，将毛巾从头上取下，再将干发网罩在头上。不过五秒钟，她的头发便显出悦人的光泽。“你绝不知道，不必戴人皮帽令我多么高兴。”她边说边套上了上衣。
“冰层和卫荷的权力有什么关系？”
“想想看，四百亿居民每天使用大量能源，每一卡能量最终都会转化成热量，而且必须设法排除。这些热量全被输送到两极，尤其是较先开发的南极，然后排放到太空去。在这个过程中，它融化了大部分的冰。我确定这解释了川陀上空云雨的来源，不论那些气象学究如何坚持实际情形比这要复杂许多。”
“在将这些热量排放之前，卫荷有没有加以利用？”
“据我所知，也许有。顺便告诉你，关于排放热量的科技，我连最粗浅的概念都没有，但我所说的是政治权力。假使达尔停止生产可用的能源，固然会造成整个川陀的不便，可是还有其他能源生产区，它们能将产量提高——此外，还有以各种方式贮存的能源可以救急。只要有段缓冲时间，达尔的问题终究可以解决。反之，卫荷……”
“怎么样？”
“嗯，川陀上所产生的各种热量，至少百分之九十由卫荷负责排放，没有任何替代办法。假使卫荷将热量发射全部关闭，整个川陀的温度便会开始上升。”
“卫荷也会。”
“啊，可是既然卫荷位于南极，它就能设法导入冷空气。这当然没法解决问题，但却可以使卫荷比川陀其他各处撑得更久。所以说，卫荷是皇上一个非常棘手的问题，而卫荷区长是——至少可以是——极有权力的人。”《基地前奏》（下）-187.JPG.TXT“那么现任卫荷区长是个什么样的人？”
“这点我不清楚。根据我偶尔听来的传闻，他似乎非常老迈，而且几乎是个隐士，但他和超空间飞船的船身一样刚硬，而且仍在老谋深算地谋夺权力。”
“为什么，我不明白？如果他那么老了，就不可能再掌权多久了。”
“谁晓得，哈里？我想这是一种终身的沉迷吧。或者它是个游戏……只是为了谋夺权力，并非真正渴求权力本身。假如他真掌握到权力，取代了丹莫茨尔的位置，甚至自己登上皇位，说不定他反而会感到失望——因为这场游戏就要结束了。当然啦，要是那时他还活着，他或许会开始下一个游戏，那就是固守这个权力。这也许和前一个游戏同样困难，因而同样令人感到满足。”
谢顿摇了摇头：“这使我有一种感想，不可能有人想要当皇帝。”
“我同意——神智清醒的人都不会。但是这种通常所谓的‘皇帝梦’像一种疾病，一旦染上就会使人丧失神智。而你越接近高位，就越有可能染上这种疾病。随着一次又一次的晋升……”
“这种疾病就会变得更加无可救药。没错，我明白这点。但我还有另一个感想，川陀是如此庞大的世界，它的需求是如此牵一发而动全身，而其中的野心家彼此间冲突又如此剧烈，使它成为皇帝治下主要的不稳定因素。皇帝为什么不干脆离开川陀，定都在某个较单纯的世界？”
铎丝哈哈大笑：“假如你了解历史，就不会问这个问题。根据数千年来的惯例，川陀就等于帝国。一个皇帝若不在皇宫之中，他就不算是个皇帝。事实上，皇帝更像是个地方，而不像是个人。”
谢顿陷入沉默，面孔也变得刚毅。
过了一会儿，铎丝问道：“怎么回事？”
“我在寻思，”他含糊应道，“自从你告诉我那个毛手毛脚的故事之后，我就有一种飘忽的想法。现在你又提到皇帝比较像个地方，而不像一个人，似乎刚好引起共鸣。”
“什么样的共鸣？”
谢顿摇了摇头：“我仍在寻思，或许我全搞错了。”他瞪着铎丝的目光变得尖锐，视线重新聚焦。“无论如何，我们该下去吃早餐了。我们已经迟到啦，我想堤沙佛夫人没有那么好的心情，会帮我们把早餐端进来。”
“你是个乐天派，”铎丝说，“我自己的感觉是，她没有那么好的心情，会想让我们留下来——不论有没有早餐。她想要让我们离开这里。”
“或许如此，但我们让她有钱可赚。”
“没错，但我怀疑她现在恨我们入骨，根本不屑赚我们的信用点。”
“说不定她的丈夫会对房租比较难分难舍一点。”
“如果他敢说任何话，哈里，堤沙佛夫人绝对会比我更惊讶。很好，我准备好了。”
于是他们走下楼梯，来到堤沙佛一家在这栋公寓的活动范围，发现两人讨论的那位女士正等在那里——虽然没准备早餐，却准备了一个更大的惊奇。
Chapter 78
Casilia Tisalver stood ramrod straight with a tight smile on her round face and her dark eyes glinting. Her husband was leaning moodily against the wall. In the center of the room were two men who were standing stiffly upright, as though they had noticed the cushions on the floor but scorned them. Both had the dark crisp hair and the chick black mustache to be expected of Dahlites. Both were thin and both were dressed in dark clothes so nearly alike that they were surely uniforms. There was thin white piping up and over the shoulders and down the sides of the tubular trouser legs. Each had, on the right side of his chest, a rather dim Spaceship-and-Sun, the symbol of the Galactic Empire on every inhabited world of the Galaxy, with, in this case, a dark "D" in the center of the sun.
Seldon realized immediately that these were two members of the Dahlite security forces.
"Whats all this?" said Seldon sternly.
One of the men stepped forward. "I am Sector Officer Lanel Russ. This is my partner, Gebore Astinwald."
Both presented glittering identification holo-tabs. Seldon didnt bother looking at them. "What it is you want?"
Russ said calmly, "Are you Hari Seldon of Helicon?"
"I am."
"And are you Dors Venabili of Cinna, Mistress?"
"I am," said Dors.
"Im here to investigate a complaint that one Hari Seldon instigated a riot yesterday."
"I did no such thing," said Seldon.
"Our information is," said Russ, looking at the screen of a small computer pad, "that you accused a newsman of being an Imperial agent, thus instigating a riot against him."
Dors said, "It was I who said he was an Imperial agent, Officer. I had reason to think he was. It is surely no crime to express ones opinion. The Empire has freedom of speech."
"That does not cover an opinion deliberately advanced in order to instigate a riot."
"How can you say it was, Officer?"
At this point, Mistress Tisalver interposed in a shrill voice, "I can say it, Officer. She saw there was a crowd present, a crowd of gutter people who were just looking for trouble. She deliberately said he was an Imperial agent when she knew nothing of the sort and she shouted it to the crowd to stir them up. It was plain that she knew what she was doing."
"Casilia," said her husband pleadingly, but she cast one look at him and he said no more.
Russ turned to Mistress Tisalver. "Did you lodge the complaint, Mistress?"
"Yes. These two have been living here for a few days and theyve done nothing but make trouble. Theyve invited people of low reputation into my apartment, damaging my standing with my neighbors."
"Is it against the law, Officer," asked Seldon, "to invite clean, quiet citizens of Dahl into ones room? The two rooms upstairs are our rooms. We have rented them and they are paid for. Is it a crime to speak to Dahlites in Dahl, Officer?"
"No, it is not," said Russ. "That is not part of the complaint. What gave you reason, Mistress Venabili, to suppose the person you so accused was, in fact, an Imperial agent?"
Dors said, "He had a small brown mustache, from which I concluded he was not a Dahlite. I surmised he was an Imperial agent."
"You surmised? Your associate, Master Seldon, has no mustache at all. Do you surmise he is an Imperial agent?"
"In any case," said Seldon hastily, "there was no riot. We asked the crowd to take no action against the supposed newsman and Im sure they didnt."
"Youre sure, Master Seldon?" said Russ. "Our information is that you left immediately after making your accusation. How could you witness what happened after you left?"
"I couldnt," said Seldon, "but let me ask you--Is the man dead? Is the man hurt?"
"The man has been interviewed. He denies he is an Imperial agent and we have no information that he is. He also claims he was handled roughly."
"He may well be lying in both respects," said Seldon. "I would suggest a Psychic Probe."
"That cannot be done on the victim of a crime," said Russ. "The sector government is very firm on that. It might do if you two, as the criminals in this case, each underwent a Psychic Probe. Would you like us to do that?"
Seldon and Dors exchanged glances for a moment, then Seldon said, "No, of course not."
"Of course not," repeated Russ with just a tinge of sarcasm in his voice, "but youre ready enough to suggest it for someone else." The other officer, Astinwald, who had so far not said a word, smiled at this. Russ said, "We also have information that two days ago you engaged in a knife fight in Billibotton and badly hurt a Dahlite citizen named"--he struck a button on his computer pad and studied the new page on the screen--"Elgin Marron."
Dors said, "Does your information tell you how the fight started?"
"That is irrelevant at the moment, Mistress. Do you deny that the fight took place?"
"Of course we dont deny the fight took place," said Seldon hotly, "but we deny that we in any way instigated that. We were attacked. Mistress Venabili was seized by this Marron and it was clear he was attempting to rape her. What happened afterward was pure self-defense. Or does Dahl condone rape?"
Russ said with very little intonation in his voice, "You say you were attacked? By how many?"
"Ten men."
"And you alone--with a woman--defended yourself against ten men?"
"Mistress Venabili and I defended ourselves. Yes."
"How is it, then, that neither of you shows any damage whatever? Are either of you cut or bruised where it doesnt show right now?"
"No, Officer."
"How is it, then, that in the fight of one--plus a woman--against ten, you are in no way hurt, but that the complainant, Elgin Marron, has been hospitalized with wounds and will require a skin transplant on his upper lip?"
"We fought well," said Seldon grimly.
"Unbelievably well. What would you say if I told you that three men have testified that you and your friend attacked Marron, unprovoked?"
"I would say that it belies belief that we should. Im sure that Marron has a record as a brawler and knifeman. I tell you that there were ten there. Obviously, six refused to swear to a lie. Do the other three explain why they did not come to the help of their friend if they witnessed him under unprovoked attack and in danger of his life? It must be clear to you that they are lying."
"Do you suggest a Psychic Probe for them?"
"Yes. And before you ask, I still refuse to consider one for us."
Russ said, "We have also received information that yesterday, after leaving the scene of the riot, you consulted with one Davan, a known subversive who is wanted by the security police. Is that true?"
"Youll have to prove that without help from us," said Seldon. "Were not answering any further questions."
Russ put away his pad. "Im afraid I must ask you to come with us to headquarters for further interrogation."
"I dont think thats necessary, Officer," said Seldon. "We are Outworlders who have done nothing criminal. We have tried to avoid a newsman who was annoying us unduly, we tried to protect ourselves against rape and possible murder in a part of the sector known for criminal behavior, and weve spoken to various Dahlites. We see nothing there to warrant our further questioning. It would come under the heading of harassment."
"We make these decisions," said Russ. "Not you. Will you please come with us?"
"No, we will not," said Dors.
"Watch out!" cried out Mistress Tisalver. "Shes got two knives."
Officer Russ sighed and said, "Thank you, Mistress, but I know she does." He turned to Dors. "Do you know its a serious crime to carry a knife without a permit in this sector? Do you have a permit?"
"No, Officer, I dont."
"It was clearly with an illegal knife, then, that you assaulted Marron? Do you realize that that greatly increases the seriousness of the crime?"
"It was no crime, Officer," said Dors. "Understand that. Marron had a knife as well and no permit, I am certain."
"We have no evidence to that effect and while Marron has knife wounds, neither of you have any."
"Of course he had a knife, Officer. If you dont know that every man in Billibotton and most men elsewhere in Dahl carry knives for which they probably dont have permits, then youre the only man in Dahl who doesnt know. There are shops here wherever you turn that sell knives openly. Dont you know that?"
Russ said, "It doesnt matter what I know or dont know in this respect. Nor does it matter whether other people are breaking the law or how many of them do. All that matters at this moment is that Mistress Venabili is breaking the anti-knife law. I must ask you to give up those knives to me right now, Mistress, and the two of you must then accompany me to headquarters."
Dors said, "In that case, take my knives away from me."
Russ sighed. "You must not think, Mistress, that knives are all the weapons there are in Dahl or that I need engage you in a knife fight. Both my partner and I have blasters that will destroy you in a moment, before you can drop your hands to your knife hilt--however fast you are. We wont use a blaster, of course, because we are not here to kill you. However, each of us also has a neuronic whip, which we can use on you freely. I hope you wont ask for a demonstration. It wont kill you, do you permanent harm of any kind, or leave any marks--but the pain is excruciating. My partner is holding a neuronic whip on you right now. And here is mine.--Now, let us have your knives, Mistress Venabili."
There was a moments pause and then Seldon said, "Its no use, Dors. Give him your knives."
And at that moment, a frantic pounding sounded at the door and they all heard a voice raised in high-pitched expostulation.

第七十八章
　　卡西莉娅•堤沙佛直板板地站在那里，她的圆脸带着僵硬的笑容，一双黑眼珠闪闪发光。她的丈夫则闷闷不乐地倚在墙边。房间中央还有两个人，他们都站得笔直，仿佛早已注意到地板上的坐垫，却不屑坐在上面。
这两个人都有一头卷曲的黑发，以及达尔人必备的粗黑八字胡。两人都很瘦小，皆穿着一套黑色服装。那两件衣服极其相似，看来是一种制服，从肩头到管状裤腿的外侧都绣着细白的滚边。他们的右胸挂着一个不甚明显的“星舰与太阳”标志，在银河中每一个住人世界上，它所代表的都是银河帝国。而他们两人身上的标志，在太阳中央还有一个深色的“达”字。
谢顿立刻了解，这两人是达尔安全警察的成员。
“这是怎么回事？”谢顿以严厉的口气说。
其中一人向前走来。“我是区巡官拉涅尔•鲁斯；这是我的搭档，葛柏•艾斯汀伍德。”
两人都出示了亮晶晶的全息标签识别证。谢顿根本懒得看，只是问道：“你们想干什么？”
鲁斯以平静的口气说：“你是赫利肯的哈里•谢顿吗？”
“我就是。”
“而你是锡纳的铎丝•凡纳比里吗，夫人？”
“我就是。”铎丝答道。
“我来这里是要处理一件投诉案件，昨天有个哈里•谢顿煽起一桩暴动。”
“我没做那种事。”谢顿说。
“我们的情报指出，”鲁斯看了看一个小型计算机版的屏幕，“你指控一名记者是帝国特务，因此煽起一场暴动对付他。”
铎丝说：“说他是帝国特务的人是我，警官，我有理由这样认为。表达一个人的意见当然没有罪，帝国有言论自由。”
“那不包括为了煽起暴动故意提出的意见。”
“你怎能这样说，警官！”
这时，堤沙佛夫人以尖锐的声音插嘴道：“我能这样说，警官。当时她看到外面有一群人，一群从贫民区来的人，他们只是想找麻烦。她故意对群众喊话、煽动他们，说他是帝因特务，其实她根本不懂什么是特务。事实很明显，她知道自己在做什么。”
“卡西莉娅。”她的丈夫以恳求的语气唤她。她瞪了他一眼，后者随即沉默下来。
鲁斯转向堤沙佛夫人：“是你投诉的吗，夫人？”
“是的。这两人在这里住了好几天，除了惹麻烦什么也不干。他们邀请低级民众进我的公寓，破坏我在邻居心目中的地位。”
“邀请干净、平和的达尔公民进某人的房间，警官，”谢顿问道，“难道是违法的行为吗？楼上两个房间是我们的，我们已经租下，并且付了房租。在达尔境内和达尔人交谈也犯法吗，警官？”
“不，不是的。”鲁斯说，“那并非投诉的一部分。你究竟有什么理由，凡纳比里夫人，认为你指控的那个人确实是帝国特务？”
铎丝说：“他只有两小撇棕色胡须，我据此断定他不是达尔人，我推测他是一名帝国特务。”
“你推测？你的同伴——谢顿老爷，他根本没有胡子，你也推测他是一名帝国特务吗？”
“无论如何，”谢顿急忙说道，“根本没有暴动。我们要求群众别对那个所谓的记者采取任何行动，我确定他们没有那样做。”
“你确定，谢顿老爷？”鲁斯说，“根据我们的情报，你们做出指控后立刻离去。在你离去后，你怎能目睹发生了什么事？”
“我不能，”谢顿说，“但是容我请教一下——那人死了吗？还是受伤了？”
“那人曾接受约谈。他否认自己是帝国特务，我们也没有情报显示这点。他还声称曾经遭到虐待。”
“他很可能在两方面都撒了谎，”谢顿说，“我建议使用心灵探测器。”
“不能对案件的受害者那样做，”鲁斯说，“区政府对这点非常坚持。倒是有可能让你们两人——这件案子中的罪犯——接受一次心灵探测器的检验。你们希望我们那样做吗？”
谢顿与铎丝交换了一下眼色，然后谢顿说：“不，当然不要。”
“当然不要？”鲁斯重复道，声音中仅有些许嘲讽之意。“你却毫不犹豫地建议对别人这样做。”
另外那位警官，艾斯汀伍德，目前为止尚未说半句话，此时则露出微笑。
鲁斯又说：“我们还有情报显示，昨天你们在脐眼有过一场械斗，而且重伤一名达尔公民，名叫——”他按下计算机版的一个按键，读了读屏幕上的新画面：“厄金•玛隆。”
铎丝说：“你的情报有没有告诉你械斗的起因？”
“那和现在的问题毫无关联，夫人。你们否认发生过那场械斗吗？”
“我们当然不否认发生过械斗，”谢顿激动地说，“但我们否认是我们挑起来的。当时我们遭到攻击，凡纳比里夫人被这个玛隆抓住，而且他显然企图强暴她。接下来发生的事，只是单纯的自卫行动。难道达尔纵容强暴吗？”
鲁斯以近乎平板的声音说：“你说你们遭到攻击？被多少人攻击？”
“十名男子。”
“而你只有一个人，再加上一个女的，抵抗这十名男子？”
“只有凡纳比里夫人和我两人御敌，是的。”
“那么，你们两人怎么没有挂彩？你们有哪一个被割伤或打伤，——伤在看不见的部位？”
“没有，警官。”
“那么，在一个人——再加个女的——对付十人的格斗中，你们怎么会毫发无损？而那个原告，厄金•玛隆，却伤痕累累地躺在医院里，而且上唇需要接受皮肤移植？”
“我们应付得好。”谢顿绷着脸说。
“妤得难以置信。如果我告诉你，有三个人作证说你和你的朋友攻击玛隆——在毫无挑衅的情况下，你会怎么说？”
“我会说没人相信我们会那样做。我确定玛隆有案可查，是个滋事分子和带刀的凶徒。我告诉你当时有十个人，显然，有六个拒绝为谎言宣誓作证。其他三人有没有解释，为何他们未曾出手帮助他们的朋友——若是他们果真目睹他遭到毫无来由的攻击，而且性命受到威胁？你一定心知肚明，晓得他们是在说谎，”
“你建议对他们施用心灵探测器吗？”
“是的。而且你不用再问，我仍拒绝考虑用在我们身上。”
鲁斯说：“此外我们还接到情报，说你昨天离开暴动现场后，曾经去找一个叫达凡的人，一个被安全警察通缉在案的颠覆分子商议。这是真的吗？”
“你得自己证明这一点。”谢顿说，“我们不准备再回答任何问题。”
鲁斯将计算机版放回去。“只怕你们必须跟我们回总部接受进一步的侦讯。”
“我不认为有这个必要，警官。”谢顿说，“我们是外星人士，没有任何犯罪行为。我们曾经试图回避一名记者，因为他过分骚扰我们；而在本区中以犯罪闻名的地带，我们曾经试图保护自己，避免遭到强暴和可能的杀害；此外，我们也和许多达尔人谈过话。我看不出有任何理由该对我们做进一步的盘问，那样做等于是一种骚扰。”
“作决定的人是我们，”鲁斯说，“不是你。请你们跟我们走好吗？”
“不，我们不去。”铎丝说。
“小心！”堤沙佛夫人叫道：“她有两把刀子。”
鲁斯警官叹了一声：“谢谢你，夫人，不过我早就知道了。”他又转向铎丝，说：“你可知道在本区末经许可携带月械是一项重罪？你有许可证吗？”
“不，警官，我没有。”
“那么，你用来攻击玛隆的武器，显然是一把非法的刀械。这可是严重的罪上加罪，你知道吗？”
“这不算什么罪。”铎丝说，“请你了解一件事，玛隆也有一把刀，而且我确定他没许可证。”
“这点我们并无证据，而且玛隆身上有刀伤，你们两人谁也没有。”
“他当然有一把刀，警官。假使你不知道脐眼每一个人，以及达尔大部分的人都带着刀，而且或许都没有许可证，那你就是达尔唯一不知不晓的人。在此地不论你转到哪里，都能找到公然贩刀的商店。这点你不知道吗？”
鲁斯说：“我对这方面知道多少并不重要，其他人是否违法或有多少人违法也不重要。此时此刻，重要的是凡纳比里夫人触犯了反刀械法。我必须请你立刻将那两把刀交给我，夫人，然后你们两人必须随我到总部去。”
铎丝说：“既然这样，把我的刀子取走啊。”
鲁斯又叹了一声：“夫人，你一定不会认为刀械是我们达尔唯一的武器，或是我需要和你进行一场刀战。我的搭档和我都有手铳，可以在瞬间将你摧毁，远在你的双手能碰到刀把之前——不论你有多快。当然，我们不会使用手铳，因为我们不是来杀你的。然而，我们每人都有一柄神经鞭，可以随意用来对付你。我希望你不会要求一次示范。它不会要你的命，或是造成任何永久性伤害，甚至不会留下任何伤痕——但那种痛苦绝对难以忍受。现在我的搭档正举着神经鞭对着你，而这是我的——好啦，把你的刀交给我们，凡纳比里夫人。”
顿了一会之后，谢顿说：“没有用的，铎丝，把你的刀给他。”
就在这时，大门响起一阵狂暴的敲击声，一个高八度的吼叫声传了进来。
Chapter 79

Raych had not entirely left the neighborhood after he had walked them back to their apartment house.
He had eaten well while waiting for the interview with Davan to be done and later had slept a bit after finding a bathroom that more or less worked. He really had no place to go now that all that was done. He had a home of sorts and a mother who was not likely to be perturbed if he stayed away for a while. She never was.
He did not know who his father was and wondered sometimes if he really had one. He had been told he had to have one and the reasons for that had been explained to him crudely enough. Sometimes he wondered if he ought to believe so peculiar a story, but he did find the details titillating. He thought of that in connection with the lady. She was an old lady, of course, but she was pretty and she could fight like a man--better than a man. It filled him with vague notions.
And she had offered to let him take a bath. He could swim in the Billibotton pool sometimes when he had some credits he didnt need for anything else or when he could sneak in. Those were the only times he got wet all over, but it was chilly and he had to wait to get dry.
Taking a bath was different. There would be hot water, soap, towels, and warm air. He wasnt sure what it would feel like, except that it would be nice if she was there.
He was walkway-wise enough to know of places where he could park himself in an alley off a walkway that would be near a bathroom and still be near enough to where she was, yet where he probably wouldnt be found and made to run away. He spent the night thinking strange thoughts. What if he did learn to read and write? Could he do something with that? He wasnt sure what, but maybe they could tell him. He had vague ideas of being paid money to do things he didnt know how to do now, but he didnt know what those things might be. He would have to be told, but how do you get told?
If he stayed with the man and the lady, they might help. But why should they want him to stay with them?
He drowsed off, coming to later, not because the light was brightening, but because his sharp ears caught the heightening and deepening of sounds from the walkway as the activities of the day began.
He had learned to identify almost every variety of sound, because in the underground maze of Billibotton, if you wanted to survive with even a minimum of comfort, you had to be aware of things before you saw them. And there was something about the sound of a ground-car motor that he now heard that signaled danger to him. It had an official sound, a hostile sound. He shook himself awake and stole quietly toward the walkway. He scarcely needed to see the Spaceship-and-Sun on the ground-car. Its lines were enough. He knew they had to be coming for the man and the lady because they had seen Davan.
He did not pause to question his thoughts or to analyze them. He was off on a run, beating his way through the gathering life of the day. He was back in less than fifteen minutes. The ground-car was still there and there were curious and cautious onlookers gazing at it from all sides and from a respectful distance. There would soon be more. He pounded his way up the stairs, trying to remember which door he should bang on. No time for the elevator. He found the door--at least he thought he did--and he banged, shouting in a squeak, "Lady! Lady!"
He was too excited to remember her name, but he remembered part of the mans.
"Hari!" he shouted. "Let me in."
The door opened and he rushed in--tried to rush in. The rough hand of an officer seized his arm. "Hold it, kid. Where do you think youre going?"
"Leggo! I aint done nothin." He looked about. "Hey, lady, whatre they doin?"
"Arresting us," said Dors grimly.
"What for?" said Raych, panting and struggling. "Hey, leggo, you Sunbadger. Dont go with him, lady. You dont have to go with him."
"You get out," said Russ, shaking the boy vehemently.
"No, I aint, You aint either, Sunbadger. My whole gang is coming. You aint gettin out, lessn you let these guys go."
"What whole gang?" said Russ, frowning.
"Theyre right outside now. Probly takin your ground-car apart. And theyll take yore apart."
Russ turned toward his partner, "Call headquarters. Have them send out a couple of trucks with Macros."
"No!" shrieked Raych, breaking loose and rushing at Astinwald. "Dont call!"
Russ leveled his neuronic whip and fired.
Raych shrieked, grasped at his right shoulder, and fell down, wriggling madly. Russ had not yet turned back to Seldon, when the latter, seizing him by the wrist, pushed the neuronic whip up in the air and then around and behind, while stamping on his foot to keep him relatively motionless. Hari could feel the shoulder dislocate, even while Russ emitted a hoarse, agonized yell. Astinwald raised his blaster quickly, but Dorss left arm was around his shoulder and the knife in her right hand was at his throat.
"Dont move!" she said. "Move a millimeter, any part of you, and I cut you through your neck to the spine.--drop the blaster. drop it! And the neuronic whip."
Seldon picked up Raych, still moaning, and held him tightly. He turned to Tisalver and said, "There are people out there. Angry people. Ill have them in here and theyll break up everything youve got. Theyll smash the walls. If you dont want that to happen, pick up those weapons and throw them into the next room. Take the weapons from the security officer on the door and do the same. Quickly! Get your wife to help. Shell think twice next time before sending in complaints against innocent people.--Dors, this one on the floor wont do anything for a while. Put the other one out of action, but dont kill him."
"Right," said Dors. Reversing her knife, she struck him hard on the skull with the haft. He went to his knees.
She made a face. "I hate doing that."
"They fired at Raych," said Seldon, trying to mask his own sick feeling at what had happened.
They left the apartment hurriedly and, once out on the walkway, found it choked with people, almost all men, who raised a shout when they saw them emerge. They pushed in close and the smell of poorly washed humanity was overpowering. Someone shouted, "Where are the Sunbadgers?"
"Inside," called out Dors piercingly. "Leave them alone. Theyll be helpless for a while, but theyll get reinforcements, so get out of here fast."
"What about you?" came from a dozen throats.
"Were getting out too. We wont be back."
"Ill take care of them," shrilled Raych, struggling out of Seldons arms and standing on his feet. He was rubbing his right shoulder madly. "I can walk. Lemme past."
The crowd opened for him and he said, "Mister, lady, come with me. Fast!" They were accompanied down the walkway by several dozen men and then Raych suddenly gestured at an opening and muttered, "In here, folks. Ill rake ya to a place no one will ever find ya. Even Davan probly dont know it. Only thing is, we got to go through the sewer levels. No one will see us there, but its sort of stinky ... know what I mean?"
"I imagine well survive," muttered Seldon.
And down they went along a narrow spiraling ramp and up rose the mephitic odors to greet them.
第七十九章
　　芮奇带他们回到公寓后，并未真正离开这个小区。
在达凡住处外等待的时候，他利用时间饱餐了一顿。后来，在找到一间多少还能使用的盥洗室后，他又小睡了一会儿。现在能做的事都做了，他实在没什么地方可去。他也箅有个家，但他即使有一阵子不回去，他的母亲也不大可能担心，她从来都不会。
他不知道自己的父亲是谁，有时甚至怀疑是否真有一个父亲。不过有人曾告诉他，说他一定要有一个，并以足够露骨的方式将理由解释给他听。他有时也怀疑是否该相信这么奇特的故事，但他的确发觉那些细节令人心痒。
他将那件事与那位大姐联想到一块。她当然是个年纪不小的大姐，可是她相当漂亮，而且能像男人一样打斗——甚至比男人更厉害。这使他心中模模糊糊地有种感觉。
而且，她还提议要让他洗个澡！他有时能在脐眼的游泳池泡一泡，那是当他有些没处花的信用点，或是能偷溜进去的时候。游泳是他唯一全身浸湿的机会，但总是相当寒冷，而且事后还得把身子晾干。
洗澡则是完全不同的一回事，会有热水、肥皂、毛巾与热气流。他不确定那会是什么样的感觉，只晓得如果她也在场必将十分美好。
他对这一带的人行道非常熟悉，知道躲在旁边巷道内的哪些地方，不但离她近，又距麝洗室不远，而且还不会被人发现，不至于落荒而逃。
他整夜都在冒出一些奇怪的念头。他要是真的学会读书写字，那会怎么样？他能用这本事做什么事吗？他不确定能做什么，但她或许能告诉他。对于做些现在不知道如何做的事而赚到工资，他有些模糊的概念，但不晓得那会是此什么样的事。这得有人告诉他才行，可是要怎样才能找到这样的人？
假如他留在那个男人与那位大姐身边，他们或许会帮助他。但是，他们留他在身边要干吗？
他打起瞌睡，不久又清醒过来，并非因为光线变得明亮，而是尖锐的耳朵察觉到来自人行道的声音有了大幅起落，标志着一天的活动已经开始。
他早已学会分辨儿乎每一种不同的卢音，因为在脐眼这种地底迷宫，即使想要以最低限度的舒适存活，也必须在看到任何事物前能先察觉。他现在听到的是地面车发动机的声音，对他而言那通常代表危险，这回更多夹带了一重意义。它具有一种官方的声音，一种敌意的声音……
他甩了甩头，让自己清醒过来，再悄悄向人行道走去。光看车子的外形，他就知道用不着再去找那辆车上的“星舰与太阳”标志。他知道，他们必定是来抓那一男一女的，因为他们曾经见过达凡。他未曾停下来质疑自己的想法或加以分析，而是立刻拔腿飞奔，存逐渐拥挤的人群中冲出一条路。
不到十五分钟他又回来了。那辆地面车仍在那里，许多好奇而谨慎的旁观者站在远处，从四面八方向这里望来——很快还会涌来更多人。他一面“砰砰砰”地爬上楼梯，一面试着记起该捶哪家的门——根本没时间搭升降机。
他终于找到那扇门——至少他认为如此。他开始使劲捶门，同时以尖锐的声音喊道：“大姐！大姐！”
他竟然激动地一时忘了她的名字，不过他还记得那男子的部分姓名。“哈里！”他吼道，“让我进去。”
房门打开后，他立刻冲进去——应该说试图冲进去。一名警官的粗大手掌抓住他的手臂。“慢着，小子，你以为你要到哪里去？”
“撒手！我啥也没做。”他四下望了望，“嘿，大姐，他们在干啥？”
“要逮捕我们。”铎丝绷着脸说。
“为什么？”芮奇一面喘气一面挣扎，“嘿，撒手，你这个太阳徽仔。别跟他走，大姐，你不必跟他走。”
“你滚开。”鲁斯一面说，一面猛力摇晃这个男孩。
“不，我不。你也别走，太阳徽仔。我的整帮人就要来啦，你逃不掉的，除非你让这两个人走。”
“什么整帮人？”鲁斯皱起眉头。
“现在他们就在外面，说不定正在拆你的地面车，他们还会把你也拆了。”
鲁斯转向他的搭档：“通知总部，要他们派几辆载满宏的卡车来。”
“不！”芮奇尖叫一卢，甩脱鲁斯，朝艾斯汀伍德冲过去，“别打电话！”
鲁斯举起神经鞭，瞄准后就是一枪。
芮奇惨叫一声，伸手抓住自己的右肩，随即跌倒在地，身子发狂般抽搐。
鲁斯还来不及转身，谢顿已从后面抓住他的手腕，将神经鞭推向半空，再将他的手扭到身后，同时踏住他一只脚，令他几乎动弹不得。在鲁斯发出嘶哑、痛苦的叫喊时，谢顿已能感到他的肩膀脱臼了。
艾斯汀伍德很快举起他的手铳，但铎丝的左臂搂住了他的肩膀，右手的刀子架在他的喉头。
“别动！”她说，“只要你一动——不论你身上哪个部位都一样，这把刀会从你的颈子一直切到脊柱。把手铳丢掉，丢掉！还有神经鞭。”
谢顿扶起仍在呻吟的芮奇，将他紧紧抱住，然后转向堤沙佛说：“外面有大批群众，愤怒的群众。假如我叫他们进来这里，他们会打烂你所有的一切，还会把每一面墙打碎。如果你不想发生这种事，就捡起这些武器，把它们丢到隔壁房间。还有，那个躺在地板上的也一样，把他身上的武器通通取走，同样丢到隔壁去。快！叫你太太帮忙。下次她控告无辜者之前，她会三思而行。铎丝，这个倒在地板上的暂时不能动，让另一个也失去行动能力，但是别杀他。”
“好的。”铎丝答道。她倒转刀身，用刀柄在那人头盖骨上重击一记，他立刻屈膝倒地。
她做了个鬼脸：“我痛恨这样做。”
“他们先攻击芮奇。”谢顿这么说，试图掩饰自己对这些事的厌恶。
他们匆匆离开那栋公寓，来到了人行道，立刻发觉外面人山人海，其中几乎部是男性。看到他们出现之后，那些人发出一声欢呼。他们纷纷向前凑近，一股从未好好洗澡的强烈气味扑鼻而朱。
有人喊道：“那些太阳徽仔在哪里？”
“黾面，”铎丝以刺耳的声音叫道，“别管他们。他们会有一阵子什么事也无法做，不过他们将得到增援，大家尽快散了吧。”
“你们怎么办？”十多个人异口同声问道。
“我们也要离开，不会再回来。”
“我会照顾他们。”芮奇尖声道，说完便挣脱谢顿的臂膀，自己站了起来。他一面拼命搓揉右肩，　一面说：“我可以走，让我过。”
群众为他让出一条路，他说：“先生，大姐，跟我来。快！”
几十名男子陪同他们沿着人行道前进。走了一会儿之后，芮奇突然指着一个开口处，喃喃说道：“这里，伙伴们。我要带你们到一个谁也找不到的地方，就连达凡说不定也不知道。只是有一件事，我们得通过污水层。那里不会有人发现我们，不过有那么点臭……知道我的意思吗？”
“我想我们死不了。”谢顿喃喃答道。
于是他们沿着狭窄的螺旋坡道向下走，迎接他们的恶臭逐渐向上袭来。
Chapter 80
Raych found them a hiding place. It had meant climbing up the metal rungs of a ladder and it had led them to a large loftlike room, the use of which Seldon could not imagine. It was filled with equipment, bulky and silent, the function of which also remained a mystery. The room was reasonably clean and free of dust and a steady draft of air wafted through that prevented the dust from settling and--more important seemed to lessen the odor.
Raych seemed pleased. "Aint this nice?" he demanded. He still rubbed his shoulder now and then and winced when he rubbed too hard.
"It could be worse," said Seldon. "Do you know what this place is used for, Raych?"
Raych shrugged or began to do so and winced. "I dunno," he said. Then he added with a touch of swagger, "Who cares?"
Dors, who had sat down on the floor after brushing it with her hand and then looking suspiciously at her palm, said, "If you want a guess, I think this is part of a complex that is involved in the detoxification and recycling of wastes. The stuff must surely end up as fertilizer."
"Then," said Seldon gloomily, "those who run the complex will be down here periodically and may come at any moment, for all we know."
"I been here before," said Raych. "I never saw no one here."
"I suppose Trantor is heavily automated wherever possible and if anything calls for automation it would be this treatment of wastes," said Dors. "We may be safe ... for a while."
"Not for long. Well get hungry and thirsty, Dors."
"I can get food and water for us," said Raych. "Ya got to know how to make out if youre an alley kid."
"Thank you, Raych," said Seldon absently, "but right now Im not hungry." He sniffed. "I may never be hungry again."
"You will be," said Dors, "and even if you lose your appetite for a while, youll get thirsty. At least elimination is no problem. Were practically living over what is clearly an open sewer."
There was silence for a while. The light was dim and Seldon wondered why the Trantorians didnt keep it dark altogether. But then it occurred to him that he had never encountered true darkness in any public area. It was probably a habit in an energy-rich society. Strange that a world of forty billion should be energy-rich, but with the internal heat of the planet to draw upon, to say nothing of solar energy and nuclear fusion plants in space, it was. In fact, come to think of it, there was no energy-poor planet in the Empire. Was there a time when technology had been so primitive that energy poverty was possible? He leaned against a system of pipes through which--for all he knew--sewage ran. He drew away from the pipes as the thought occurred to him and he sat down next to Dors.
He said, "Is there any way we can get in touch with Chetter Hummin?"
Dors said, "As a matter of fact, I did send a message, though I hated to."
"You hated to?"
"My orders are to protect you. Each time I have to get in touch with him, it means Ive failed."
Seldon regarded her out of narrowed eyes. "Do you have to be so compulsive, Dors? You cant protect me against the security officers of an entire sector."
"I suppose not. We can disable a few--"
"I know. We did. But theyll send out reinforcements ... armored ground-cars ... neuronic cannon ... sleeping mist. Im not sure what they have, but theyre going to throw in their entire armory. Im sure of it."
"Youre probably right," said Dors, her mouth tightening.
"They wont find ya, lady," said Raych suddenly. His sharp eyes had moved from one to the other as they talked. "They never find Davan."
Dors smiled without joy and ruffled the boys hair, then looked at the palm of her hand with a little dismay. She said, "Im not sure if you ought to stay with us, Raych. I dont want them finding you."
"They wont find me and if I leave ya, wholl get ya food and water and wholl find ya new hidin places, so the Sunbadgersll never know where to look?"
"No, Raych, theyll find us. They dont really look too hard for Davan. He annoys them, but I suspect they dont take him seriously. Do you know what I mean?"
"You mean hes just a pain in the ... the neck and they figure he aint worth chasing all over the lot."
"Yes, thats what I mean. But you see, we hurt two of the officers very badly and theyre not going to let us get away with that. If it takes their whole force--if they have to sweep through every hidden or unused corridor in the sector--theyll get us."
Raych said, "That makes me feel like ... like [natinn]. If I didnt run in there and get zapped, ya wouldnt have taken out them officers and ya wouldnt be in such trouble."
"No, sooner or later, wed have--uh--taken them out. Who knows? We may have to take out a few more."
"Well, ya did it beautiful," said Raych. "If I hadnt been aching all over, I couldve watched more and enjoyed it."
Seldon said, "It wouldnt do us any good to try to fight the entire security system. The question is: What will they do to us once they have us? A prison sentence, surely."
"Oh no. If necessary, well have to appeal to the Emperor," put in Dors.
"The Emperor?" said Raych, wide-eyed. "You know the Emperor?"
Seldon waved at the boy. "Any Galactic citizen can appeal to the Emperor.--That strikes me as the wrong thing to do, Dors. Ever since Hummin and I left the Imperial Sector, weve been evading the Emperor."
"Not to the extent of being thrown into a Dahlite prison. The Imperial appeal will serve as a delay--in any case, a diversion--and perhaps in the course of that delay, we can think of something else."
"Theres Hummin."
"Yes, there is," said Dors uneasily, "but we cant consider him the do-it-all. For one thing, even if my message reached him and even if he was able to rush to Dahl, how would he find us here? And, even if he did, what could he do against the entire Dahlite security force?"
"In that case," said Seldon. "Were going to have to think of something we can do before they find us."
Raych said, "If ya follow me, I can keep ya ahead of them. I know every place there is around here."
"You can keep us ahead of one person, but therell be a great many, moving down any number of corridors. Well escape one group and bump into another."
They sat in uncomfortable silence for a good while, each confronting what seemed to be a hopeless situation. Then Dors Venabili stirred and said in a tense, low whisper, "Theyre here. I hear them."
For a while, they strained, listening, then Raych sprang to his feet and hissed, "They comin that way. We gotta go this way."
Seldon, confused, heard nothing at all, but would have been content to trust the others superior hearing, but even as Raych began moving hastily and quietly away from the direction of the approaching tread, a voice rang out echoing against the sewer walls. "Dont move. Dont move."
And Raych said, "Thats Davan. Howd he know we were here?"
"Davan?" said Seldon. "Are you sure?"
"Sure Im sure. Hell help."
第八十章
　　芮奇为他们找到一处藏身之地。他们攀着一架金属梯爬了许多级，才来到这个类似阁楼的大房间，谢顿无从想象它的功用是什么。室内被一具体积庞大、安静无声的设备占据，它的功能同样无从猜测。这个房间相当清洁，几乎一尘不染。通风门送出一股稳定的气流，不但阻止了灰尘的堆积，更重要的是，似乎也减轻了那股恶臭。
芮奇好像很高兴。“这里好不好？”他追问道。他仍不时搓揉他的肩头，揉得太用力时总会缩一下脖子。
“比我想象中的好，”谢顿说，“你知道这地方是做什么用的吗，芮奇？”
芮奇耸了耸肩——或者说正要这么做——却又缩了一下脖子。“我不知。”说完，他又带点倨傲补充道：“谁管它？”
铎丝用手摸摸地板，怀疑地看了看她的手掌，然后才坐下来。她说：“如果你要我猜，我想这个建筑群是做废物的去毒和回收用的，这里是它的一部分。这些东西最后当然是变成肥料。”
“那么，”谢顿以沮丧的口吻说，“那些管理这个建筑群的人，会定期下来这里，而且随时有可能来。”
“我以前在这儿待过，”芮奇说，“我从来没碰见过人。”
“我想川陀各处已尽可能高度自动化了，要说有什么东两最需要自动化，那就非废物处埋莫属。”铎丝说，“这里应该很安全……如果只是待一阵子。”
“不会太久的，我们会饿会渴，铎丝。”
“我可以找来食物和饮水。”芮奇说，“如果你是个野孩子，你就得知道该怎么凑合。”
“谢谢你，芮奇，”谢顿心不在焉地说，“可是我现在不饿。”他闻了闻周遭的气味，“我也许再也不会想吃东西了。”
“你会的，”铎丝说，“即使你暂时失去胃口，你也会口渴。在这里，至少排泄不成问题，我们等于住在一个显然是开放的下水道上。”
接着是一阵沉默。此地光线暗淡，谢顿不禁纳闷川陀人为何不让它保持完全黑暗。不过他随即想到，不论在任何公共场所，他从未遇见过真正的黑暗，这或许是能源充足社会的一种习惯。说来也真奇怪，一个拥有四百亿人口的世界竟然能源充足。不过，既然有行星内部的热量可供吸取，更别提太阳能与太空中的核融合电厂，因此事实就是如此。其实，再仔细想一想，帝国之中根本没有能源短缺的行星。过去是否曾有一段科技十分原始的时期，使得能源贫乏成为可能的事？
他倚靠在一组输送管上，据他所知，里面流动的应该是污水。想到这点后，他赶紧离开那组管子，坐到铎丝身旁。
他说：“我们有没有任何办法，能和契特•夫铭取得联络？”
铎丝说：“事实上，我的确送出了一道信息——虽然我痛恨这样做。”
“你痛恨这样做？”
“我的使命是保护你。每次我不得不和他联络时，就代表我又失败了。”
谢顿眯起眼睛凝视着她：“你一定要如此强迫自己吗，铎丝？面对整区的安全警力，你根本无法保护我。”
“我想是不行。我们能打垮几个……”
“我知道，我们做到了。但他们会派出增援部队……装甲地面车……神经炮……催眠雾。我不确定他们有些什么，可是他们会投入所有的军火，这点我确定。”
“你或许是对的。”铎丝绷着嘴说。
“他们不会抓到你。大姐。”芮奇突然说。刚才他们交谈的时候，他锐利的目光轮流扫在两人身上，“他们从没找到达凡。”
铎丝勉强笑了笑，伸手抓抓男孩的头发，然后带着些许嫌恶的表情望着自己的手掌。“我不确定你应不应该跟我们待在一起，芮奇。我不想让他们抓到你。”
“他们不会抓到我。而且我要是走了，谁来帮你们找食物和饮水，谁又来帮你们找新的藏匿地点，好让太阳徽仔永远不知上哪儿去抓？”
“不，芮奇，他们会找到我们。他们没有真正尽力寻找达凡。他为他们带来困扰，但我怀疑他们并未将他看得多严重。你知道我的意思吗？”
“你的意思是说，他只是……‘脖子上的一点小伤’，不值得翻遍整个地带追捕他。”
“是的，那正是我的意思。可是你看，我们把两名警官打成重伤，他们不会让我们就这样逍遥法外。假若他们动用全部警力；假如他们必须扫荡本区每个隐匿或无用的回廊，他们就会抓到我们。”
芮奇说：“那使我觉得自己好像……好像不算什么。如果我没跑到那里去，而且挨了一记，你们就不会撂倒那两个警官，就不会有这样的麻烦。”
“不，早晚我们还是会——嗯——撂倒他们。谁知道呢？我们也许还得再撂倒几个。”
“嗯，你的动作漂亮极了。”芮奇说，“要不是我全身疼痛，我就能看到更多细节，好好欣赏一番。”
谢顿说：“试图对抗整个安全系统，对我们没有任何好处。现在问题是：一旦抓到我们，他们会把我们怎么样？不用说，当然是判决收监。”
“噢，不。如果有必要，我们得向皇上提出上诉。”铎丝插嘴道。
“皇上？”芮奇张大眼睛，“你们认识皇上？”
谢顿对男孩挥了挥手。“任何一个银河帝国公民都能向皇上上诉——但是，铎丝，我觉得那样做是错误的。自从夫铭和我离开皇区之后，我们就一直在躲避这个皇上。”
“以前没有被丢进达尔监狱的威胁。上诉皇上将是一种拖延战术——至少是一种牵制。也许在拖延的过稃中，我们能想到什么别的办法。”
“还有夫铭呢！”
“是的，还有他。”铎丝以不安的口气说，“但我们不能把他视为万灵丹。理由之一，即使我的讯息传到他手中，即使他能赶来达尔，他又如何找到我们？还有，就算他做到这点，面对整个达尔的安全警力，他又能做些什么？”
“这样说来，”谢顿说，“在我们被发现之前，我们必须想个可行的办法。”
芮奇说：“如果你们跟我走，我能让你们一直走在他们前面，我知道附近每一个地方。”
“你也许可以让我们走在一个人前面，但他们会派出很多很多人，钻进所有的回廊。我们躲过一组人，又会撞见另外一组。”
接下来有好一阵子，他们坐在不安的沉默中，面对着一个似乎无助的局面。然后，铎丝•凡纳比里颤抖了一下，以紧张、低沉的悄悄话说：“他们来了，我听到他们了。”
他们绷紧神经，倾听了好一会儿，然后芮奇突然跳起来，掐着嗓子说：“他们从那边来，我们得往这边走。”
谢顿感到相当疑惑，他什么也没听到，不过他情愿相信其他两人的超人听觉。但就在芮奇开始迅速地、悄悄地朝脚步声相反的方向移动时，一个声音突然响起，在下水道的墙壁激起回声。“别走，别走。”
芮奇立刻说：“那是达凡，他怎么知道我们在这里？”
“达凡！”谢顿说，“你确定吗？”
“我当然确定，他会帮助我们。”
Chapter 81
Davan asked, "What happened?"
Seldon felt minimally relieved. Surely, the addition of Davan could scarcely count against the full force of the Dahl Sector, but, then again, he commanded a number of people who might create enough confusion.
He said, "You should know, Davan. I suspect that many of the crowd who were at Tisalvers place this morning were your people."
"Yes, a number were. The story is that you were being arrested and that you manhandled a squadron of Sunbadgers. But why were you being arrested?"
"Two," said Seldon, lifting two fingers. "Two Sunbadgers. And thats bad enough. Part of the reason we were being arrested was that we had gone to see you."
"Thats not enough. The Sunbadgers dont bother with me much as a general thing." He added bitterly, "They underestimate me."
"Maybe," said Seldon, "but the woman from whom we rent our rooms reported us for having started a riot ... over the newsman we ran into on our way to you. You know about that. With your people on the scene yesterday and again this morning and with two officers badly hurt, they may well decide to clean out these corridors--and that means you will suffer. I really am sorry. I had no intention or expectation of being the cause of any of this."
But Davan shook his head. "No, you dont know the Sunbadgers. Thats not enough either. They dont want to clean us up. The sector would have to do something about us if they did. Theyre only too happy to let us rot in Billibotton and the other slums. No, theyre after you. What have you done?"
Dors said impatiently, "Weve done nothing and, in any case, what does it matter? If theyre not after you and they are after us, theyre going to come down here to flush us out. If you get in the way, youll be in deep trouble."
"No, not me. I have friends--powerful friends," said Davan. "I told you that last night. And they can help you as well as me. When you refused to help us openly, I got in touch with them. They know who you are, Dr. Seldon. Youre a famous man. Theyre in a position to talk to the Mayor of Dahl and see to it that you are left alone, whatever you have done. But youll have to be taken away--out of Dahl."
Seldon smiled. Relief flooded over him. He said, "You know someone powerful, do you, Davan? Someone who responds at once, who has the ability to talk the Dahl government out of taking drastic steps, and who can take us away? Good. Im not surprised." He turned to Dors, smiling. "Its Mycogen all over again. How does Hummin do it?"
But Dors shook her head. "Too quick.--I dont understand."
Seldon said, "I believe he can do anything."
"I know him better than you do--and longer--and I dont believe that."
Seldon smiled, "Dont underestimate him." And then, as though anxious not to linger longer on that subject, he turned to Davan. "But how did you find us? Raych said you knew nothing about this place."
"He dont," shrilled Raych indignantly. "This place is all mine. I found it."
"Ive never been here before," said Davan, looking about. "Its an interesting place. Raych is a corridor creature, perfectly at home in this maze."
"Yes, Davan, we gathered as much ourselves. But how did you find it?"
"A heat-seeker. I have a device that detects infra-red radiation, the particular thermal pattern that is given off at thirty-seven degrees Celsius. It will react to the presence of human beings and not to other heat sources. It reacted to you three."
Dors was frowning. "What good is that on Trantor, where there are human beings everywhere? They have them on other worlds, but--"
Davan said, "But not on Trantor. I know. Except that they are useful in the slums, in the forgotten, decaying corridors and alleyways."
"And where did you get it?" asked Seldon.
Davan said, "Its enough that I have it.--But weve got to get you away, Master Seldon. Too many people want you and I want my powerful friend to have you."
"Where is he, this powerful friend of yours?"
"Hes approaching. At least a new thirty-seven-degree source is registering and I dont see that it can be anyone else."
Through the door strode a newcomer, but Seldons glad exclamation died on his lips. It was not Chetter Hummin.
Wye
WYE-- ... A sector of the world-city of Trantor ... In the latter centuries of the Galactic Empire, Wye was the strongest and stablest portion of the world-city. Its rulers had long aspired to the Imperial throne, justifying that by their descent from early Emperors. Under Mannix IV, Wye was militarized and (Imperial authorities later claimed) was planning a planet-wide coup .
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第八十一章
　　达凡说：“发生了什么事？”
谢顿这才稍微松了一口气。当然，面对达尔区的整个警力，多了达凡一人几乎不算什么。不过话说回来，他指挥着一大批人，他们应该可以制造足够的混乱……
他说：“你应该知道的，达凡。我猜想今天早上在堤沙佛处聚集的群众，有许多都是你的手下。”
“没错，是有不少。传闻说你们在即将被逮捕时对付了一中队的太阳徽仔。但你们为何会遭到逮捕呢？”
“两个，”谢顿一面说，一面举起两根指头。“两个太阳徽仔而已，这就够糟了。我们遭到逮捕的部分原因，就是我们曾经去见过你。”
“那还不够，太阳徽仔不怎么把我当回事。”他又以苦涩的口吻补充道，“他们低估了我。”
“或许吧，”谢顿说，“可是把房子租给我们的那个女的，告发我们曾经掀起一场暴动……对付那名我们去找你时遇到的记者，你知道这回事。你的人昨天和今天早上都在现场，再加上两名警官受了重伤，他们很可能会决定扫清这些回廊——这就代表你要遭殃。我真的很抱歉，我从未打算或指望引发这种事。”
达凡却摇了摇头：“不，你不了解那些太阳徽仔，这个理由还是不够。他们并不想清除我们，如果他们那样做了，这个区就必须为我们做些安排。让我们在脐眼和其他贫民窟中腐烂，他们高兴还来不及呢。不，他们是要抓你们——你们。你们到底做了什么？”
铎丝不耐烦地说：“我们什么也没做，而且不管怎样，这根本不重要。如他们不是在抓你，而真的是在抓我们，他们就会下来这里，把我们通通赶出去。要是你挺身而出，你就会有大麻烦。”
“不，不是我。我有些朋友——有权有势的朋友，”达凡说，“昨晚我对你们说过，他们能像帮我一样地帮助你们。在你们拒绝公开帮我们之后，我跟他们取得了联络。他们知道你是谁，谢顿博士，你是个名人。他们的地位能和达尔区长直接通话，而且能确保达尔放你们一马，不论你们曾经做过什么。可是你们必须被带走——离开达尔。”
谢顿微微一笑，全身顿感松懈。他说：“你认识某位有权有势的人，对不对，达凡？某位立即做出响应，有能力劝阻达尔政府采取激烈手段，而且能将我们带走的人？很好，我不惊讶。”他带着笑容转向铎丝，“这完全是麦曲生的翻版，夫铭是如何做到的？”
铎丝却摇了摇头：“太快了——我不懂。”
谢顿说：“我相信他做得到任何事。”
“我对他的认识比你更深，而且更久，我不相信有这种事。”
谢顿又微微一笑：“可别低估他。”然后，他仿佛急于转换话题，随即转向达凡说：“但你是怎样找到我们的？芮奇说你对此处一无所知。”
“他懂什么，”芮奇愤慨地尖叫道，“这地方全属于我，是我发现的。”
“我以前从未来过这里。”达凡一面说，一面环顾四周。“这是个有趣的地方，芮奇的确是个回廊生物，在这个迷宫中就像在家里一样。”
“没错，达凡，这我们也知道。但你是怎么找来的？”
“利用热源追踪仪。我有个装置能侦测红外辐射，针对摄氏三十七度的热辐射模式校准。它只会对人体有反应，因此我们才能侦测到你们三人的位置。”
铎丝皱着眉头说：“川陀到处都是人，这种东西在这里有什么用？其他世界不难见到，可是……”
达凡说：“可是川陀没有，这点我知道。只不过在贫民窟中，在遭人遗忘的、腐朽的回廊和窄巷中，它还是能派上用场。”
“你从哪里弄来的？”谢顿问道。
达凡说：“知道我有就够了——但我们必须将你弄走，谢顿老爷。如今想要你的人太多，而我只要那位有权有势的朋友得到你。”
“他往哪里，你那位有权有势的朋友？”
“他正走过来。至少一个新的三十七度热源显现了，除他之外，我看不出还可能会是谁。”
另一个人从门口大步走来，谢顿的欢呼却冻结在唇边——那并非契特•夫铭。
Chapter 82

The man who entered was tall and muscular. He had a long blond mustache that curled up at the tips and a fringe of hair that went down the sides of his face and under his chin, leaving the point of his chin and his lower lip smoothly bare and seeming a little moist. His head was so closely cropped and his hair was so light that, for one unpleasant moment, Seldon was reminded of Mycogen. The newcomer wore what was unmistakably a uniform. It was red and white and about his waist was a wide belt decorated with silver studs. His voice, when he spoke, was a rolling bass and its accent was not like any that Seldon had heard before. Most unfamiliar accents sounded uncouth in Seldons experience, but this one seemed almost musical, perhaps because of the richness of the low tones.
"I am Sergeant Emmer Thalus," he rumbled in a slow succession of syllables. "I have come seeking Dr. Hari Seldon."
Seldon said, "I am he." In an aside to Dors, he muttered, "if Hummin couldnt come himself, he certainly sent a magnificent side of beef to represent him."
The sergeant favored Seldon with a stolid and slightly prolonged look. Then he said, "Yes. You have been described to me. Please come with me, Dr. Seldon."
Seldon said, "Lead the way."
The sergeant stepped backward. Seldon and Dors Venabili stepped forward. The sergeant stopped and raised a large hand, palm toward Dors. "I have been instructed to take Dr. Hari Seldon with me. I have not been instructed to take anyone else."
For a moment, Seldon looked at him uncomprehendingly. Then his look of surprise gave way to anger. "Its quite impossible that you have been told that, Sergeant. Dr. Dors Venabili is my associate and my companion. She must come with me."
"That is not in accordance with my instructions, Doctor."
"I dont care about your instructions in any way, Sergeant Thalus. I do not budge without her."
"Whats more," said Dors with clear irritation, "my instructions are to protect Dr. Seldon at all times. I cannot do that unless I am with him. Therefore, where he goes, I go."
The sergeant looked puzzled. "My instructions are strict that I see to it that no harm comes to you, Dr. Seldon. If you will not come voluntarily, I must carry you to my vehicle. I will try to do so gently." He extended his two arms as though to seize Seldon by the waist and carry him off bodily.
Seldon skittered backward and out of reach. As he did so, the side of his right palm came down on the sergeants right upper arm where the muscles were thinnest, so that he struck the bone.
The sergeant drew a sudden deep breath and seemed to shake himself a bit, but turned, face expressionless, and advanced again. Davan, watching, remained where he was, motionless, but Raych moved behind the sergeant.
Seldon repeated his palm stroke a second time, then a third, but now Sergeant Thalus, anticipating the blow, lowered his shoulder to catch it on hard muscle. Dors had drawn her knives.
"Sergeant," she said forcefully. "Turn in this direction, I want you to understand I may be forced to hurt you severely if you persist in attempting to carry Dr. Seldon off against his will."
The sergeant paused, seemed to take in the slowly waving knives solemnly, then said, "It is not in my instructions to refrain from harming anyone but Dr. Seldon."
His right hand moved with surprising speed toward the neuronic whip in the holster at his hip. Dors moved as quickly forward, knives flashing. Neither completed the movement.
Dashing forward, Raych had pushed at the sergeants back with his left hand and withdrew the sergeants weapon from its holster with his right. He moved away quickly, holding the neuronic whip in both hands now and shouting, "Hands up, Sergeant, or youre gonna get it!"
The sergeant whirled and a nervous look crossed his reddening face. It was the only moment that its stolidity had weakened. "Put that down, sonny," he growled. "You dont know how it works."
Raych howled, "I know about the safety. Its off and this thing can fire. And it will if you try to rush me."
The sergeant froze. He clearly knew how dangerous it was to have an excited twelve-year-old handling a powerful weapon.
Nor did Seldon feel much better. He said, "Careful, Raych. Dont shoot. Keep your finger off the contact."
"I aint gonna let him rush me."
"He wont.--Sergeant, please dont move. Lets get something straight. You were told to take me away from here. Is that right?"
"Thats right," said the sergeant, eyes somewhat protruding and firmly fixed on Raych (whose eyes were as firmly fixed on the sergeant). "But you were not told to take anyone else. Is that right?"
"No, I was not, Doctor," said the sergeant firmly. Not even the threat of a neuronic whip was going to make him weasel. One could see that.
"Very well, but listen to me, Sergeant. Were you told not to take anyone else?"
"I just said--"
"No, no. Listen, Sergeant. Theres a difference. Were your instructions simply Take Dr. Seldon!? Was that the entire order, with no mention of anyone else, or were the orders more specific? Were your orders as follows: Take Dr. Seldon and dont take anyone else?"
The sergeant turned that over in his head, then he said, "I was told to take you, Dr. Seldon."
"Then there was no mention of anyone else, one way or the other, was there?"
Pause. "No."
"You were not told to take Dr. Venabili, but you were not told not to take Dr. Venabili either. Is that right?"
Pause. "Yes."
"So you can either take her or not take her, whichever you please?"
Long pause. "I suppose so."
"Now then, heres Raych, the young fellow whos got a neuronic whip pointing at you--your neuronic whip, remember--and he is anxious to use it."
"Yay!" shouted Raych.
"Not yet, Raych," said Seldon. "And here is Dr. Venabili with two knives that she can use very expertly and theres myself, who can, if I get the chance, break your Adams apple with one hand so that youll never speak above a whisper again. Now then, do you want to take Dr. Venabili or dont you want to? Your orders allow you to do either."
And finally the sergeant said in a beaten voice, "I will take the woman."
"And the boy, Raych."
"And the boy."
"Good. Have I your word of honor--your word of honor as a soldier--that you will do as you have just said ... honestly?"
"You have my word of honor as a soldier," said the sergeant.
"Good. Raych, give back the whip.--Now.--Dont make me wait."
Raych, his face twisted into an unhappy grimace, looked at Dors, who hesitated and then slowly nodded her head. Her face was as unhappy as Raychs. Raych held out the neuronic whip to the sergeant and said, "Theyre makin me, ya big--" His last words were unintelligible.
Seldon said, "Put away your knives, Dors."
Dors shook her head, but put them away.
"Now, Sergeant?" said Seldon.
The sergeant looked at the neuronic whip, then at Seldon. He said, "You are an honorable man, Dr. Seldon, and my word of honor holds." With a military snap, he placed his neuronic whip in his holster.
Seldon turned to Davan and said, "Davan, please forget what you have seen here. We three are going voluntarily with Sergeant Thalus. You tell Yugo Amaryl when you see him that I will not forget him and that, once this is over and I am free to act, I will see that he gets into a University. And if theres anything reasonable I can ever do for your cause, Davan, I will.--Now, Sergeant, lets go."

第八十二章
第十七部 卫荷
卫荷：……川陀这个世界性都会的一区……在银河帝国最后的数世纪，卫荷是这个世界性都会中最强盛、最稳定的部分。它的领导者始终觊觎帝位。所持理由为他们是早期皇帝的后人。
在曼尼克斯四世统治下，卫荷整军经武，而且（帝国当局事后宣称）计划一场全球性军事政变……
——《银河百科全书》


第八十二章
进来的人，高头大马、肌肉结实。他有两撇很长的金色胡须，末端向上微微翘起；两绺发束从脸颊两侧垂下来，一直垂到颚下；下巴与下唇刮得光溜溜，看来似乎有点潮湿。他的头发修剪得非常短，而且由于颜色很淡，一时之间，令谢顿忆起了麦曲生的种种不快。
那人穿的无疑是一套制服。它的颜色红白相间，在腰际存一条宽大的皮带，上面装饰着几颗银质纽扣。
当他开口时，他的声音有如隆隆作响的低音乐器，口音听来非常陌生。在谢顿的经验中，不熟悉的口音大多听来相当粗鲁，但此人的声音却几乎像音乐，或许是醇厚的低音造成的印象。
“我是爱玛•塔勒斯中士，”他吐出低沉、浑厚丽缓慢的连续音节，“我来找哈里•谢顿博士。”
谢顿说：“我就是。”他别过头来，对铎丝低声说道：“如果夫铭无法亲自前来，他显然派了一个优秀的大块头代表他。”
中士对谢顿投以木然而稍嫌冗长的一眼，然后说：“没错，上级对我描述过你的容貌。请跟我走吧，谢顿博士。”
谢顿说：“带路。”
中士向后退去，谢顿与铎丝•凡纳比里向前迈开脚步。
中士突然停下，举起一只巨大的手掌，掌心朝向铎丝：“上级指示我把哈里•谢顿博士接走，没有指示我带其他任何人。”
谢顿望着他，一时之间无法理解这是怎么回事。然后，他惊讶的神情转成了愤怒：“你不可能会接到这种指示。铎丝•凡纳比里博士是我的同事和同伴，她一定要跟我去。”
“这和我接到的指示不符，博士。”
“我根本不管你的什么指示，塔勒斯中士。不让她去的话，我一步也不走。”
“此外，”铎丝带着明显的怒意说：“我接到的指示，则是时时刻刻保护谢顿博上。除非我跟他在一起，否则我无法完成任务。因此，不论他到哪里，我都要跟去。”
中士看来十分为难：“我接到的指示，严格要求我确保你不会受到伤害，谢顿博士。如果你不肯自愿前去，我不得不抱你进入我的交通工具。我会试着动作尽量温和。”
他伸出两只手臂，仿佛要抓向谢顿的腰际，将他整个抱起来。
谢顿立刻向后一跃，让对方扑了个空。在他后退之际，他的右手掌击向中士的右臂上，刚好落在肌肉最少的位置，因此一举击中臂骨。
中士猛抽口气，身体似乎震了一下，但他随即转身，脸上毫无表情，再度向谢顿走去。达凡始终目不转睛，脚步没有丝毫移动．但芮奇已来到中士身后。
谢顿接二连二三重复他的掌击，但塔勒斯中士现在已有准备，他垂下肩头，让坚硬的肌肉承受这些攻击。
铎丝已将她的双刀拔出来。
“中士，”她强有力地说，“注意听好！我要你了解，假如你硬要试图强行带走谢顿博士，我也许不得不重伤你。”
中士顿了一下，仿佛严肃地估量着那两片缓缓挥动的利刃。然后他说：“我接到的指示，并未限制我伤害谢顿博士以外的任何人。”
他的右手以惊人的速度，向臀边皮套中的神经鞭伸去；铎丝飞快地挺进，双刀一齐刺出。
两人都没有完成动作。
芮奇猛然前冲，左手推向中士的背部，右手从皮套中抽走神经鞭。他飞快地闪了开去，用双手握着那柄武器，喊道：“举起手来，中士，否则你就要挨一记！‘，中士回旋转身，渐渐涨红的脸掠过一丝紧张的表情，这是他那木然的神态唯一减弱的一刻。“放下来，老弟。”他咆哮道，“你不知道怎么用。”
芮奇怒吼道：“我知道什么是保险开关，它现在开着，这东西可以发射。如果你试图向我冲来，它就真会发射。”
中士全身僵住。他显然知道，让一个激动的十二岁少年掌握一柄强力的武器有多危险。
谢顿的感受也好不了多少，他说：“小心，芮奇。不要发射，你的手指别碰开关。”
“我不会让他冲过来。”
“他不会的——中士，请别动，让我们把事情弄清楚。上级叫你把我带离这里，对吧？”
“对。”中士说，他的眼睛圆睁，紧紧盯在芮奇身上（后者的眼睛也同样紧紧盯在中士身上）。
“可是上级未曾叫你带其他人，是吗？”
“没有，我没接到这种指示，博士。”中士坚决地说。甚至神经鞭的威胁也无法逼使他改口，谁都能看出这点。
“很好，不过听我说，中士，上级曾叫你别带其他人吗？”
“我刚说过……”
“不，不，听好，中士，这有分别。你接到的指示只是‘带谢顿博士来’，整个指示就是这样，并未提到其他人，还是指示的内容更加特定？你接到的指示是不是‘带谢顿博士来，别带其他任何人’？”
中士的脑子转了几转，然后说：“上级叫我带你走，谢顿博士。”
“那么没有提到其他人，什么事都没提到，是不是？”
又顿了一下之后：“没有。”
“卜级没有叫你带凡纳比里博士走，但也没有叫你别带凡纳比里博士。是不是这样？”
顿了一下之后：“是的。”
“因此你可以带她也可以不带，随你高兴？”
停顿很长一段时间之后：“我想是的。”
“那么，这里站着芮奇。这位年轻朋友正拿着神经鞭指着你——记好，是你的神经鞭，而且他急着动用。”
“是啊！”芮奇喊道。
“还不要，芮奇。”谢顿说，“这里站着凡纳比里博士，手中握着两把刀，她是这种武器的大行家。此外还有我——我有能力乘机单手抓烂你的喉结，令你再也发不出比耳语更大的声音。现在，你要带凡纳比里博士同行，还是不要这样做？你的命令允许你做出选择。”
最后，中士以战败的声音说：“我会带这个女的走。”
“还有那个男孩，芮奇。”
“还有那个男孩。”
“很好。你对我以名誉担保吗？以一个军人的名誉担保，你会照你刚才说的去做……绝不耍诈？”
“我对你以一个军人的名誉担保。”中士说。
“很好。芮奇，把神经鞭还给他——赶快，别让我等。”
芮奇露出一副愁眉苦脸，转头向铎丝望去。铎丝犹豫了一下，然后缓缓点了点头，她的脸也像芮奇的一样凝重。
芮奇将神经鞭递给中士，并且说：“是他们要我这样做的，你这个大傻瓜。”最后两个字谁也听不懂。
谢顿说：“收起你的刀，铎丝。”
铎丝摇摇头，不过还是将双刀收了起来。
“好啦，中士？”谢顿说。
中士先望向神经鞭，然后又望向谢顿：“你是个可敬的人，谢顿博士，我的名誉担保一定算数。”他以利落的动作将神经鞭放回皮套中。
谢顿转头对达凡说：“达凡，请忘掉你在这里所见到的一切，我们三人是自愿随塔勒斯中士走的。当你见到雨果•阿马瑞尔时，告诉他我不会忘记他，一旦这件事告一段落，我能自由行动之后，我保证会送他进一所大学。而如果有任何合理的事，是我能为你做到的，达凡，我会做的——好啦，中士，我们走吧。”
Chapter 83
"Have you ever been in an air-jet before, Raych?" asked Hari Seldon.
Raych shook his head speechlessly. He was looking down at Upperside rushing beneath them with a mixture of fright and awe.
It struck Seldon again how much Trantor was a world of Expressways and tunnels. Even long trips were made underground by the general population. Air travel, however common it might be on the Outworlds, was a luxury on Trantor and an air-jet like this-- How had Hummin managed it? Seldon wondered.
He looked out the window at the rise and fall of the domes, at the general green in this area of the planet, the occasional patches of what were little less than jungles, the arms of the sea they occasionally passed over, with its leaden waters taking on a sudden all-too-brief sparkle when the sun peeped out momentarily from the heavy cloud layer.
An hour or so into the flight, Dors, who was viewing a new historical novel without much in the way of apparent enjoyment, clicked it off and said, "I wish I knew where weeeere going."
"If you cant tell," said Seldon, "then I certainly cant. Youve been on Trantor longer than I have."
"Yes, but only on the inside," said Dors. "Out here, with only Upperside below me, Im as lost as an unborn infant would be."
"Oh well.--Presumably, Hummin knows what hes doing."
"Im sure he does," replied Dors rather tartly, "but that may have nothing to do with the present situation. Why do you continue to assume any of this represents his initiative?"
Seldons eyebrows lifted. "Now that you ask, I dont know. I just assumed it. Why shouldnt this be his?"
"Because whoever arranged it didnt specify that I be taken along with you. I simply dont see Hummin forgetting my existence. And because he didnt come himself, as he did at Streeling and at Mycogen."
"You cant always expect him to, Dors. He might well be occupied. The astonishing thing is not that he didnt come on this occasion but that he did come on the previous ones."
"Assuming he didnt come himself, would he send a conspicuous and lavish flying palace like this?" She gestured around her at the large luxurious jet.
"It might simply have been available. And he might have reasoned that no one would expect something as noticeable as this to be carrying fugitives who were desperately trying to avoid detection. The well-known double-double-cross."
"Too well-known, in my opinion. And would he send an idiot like Sergeant Thalus in his place?"
"The sergeant is no idiot. Hes simply been trained to complete obedience. With proper instructions, he could be utterly reliable."
"There you are, Hari. We come back to that. Why didnt he get proper instructions? Its inconceivable to me that Chetter Hummin would tell him to carry you out of Dahl and not say a word about me. Inconceivable."
And to that Seldon had no anseer and his spirits sank.
Another hour passed and Dors said, "It looks as if its getting colder outside. The green of Upperside is turning brown and I believe the heaters have turned on."
"What does that signify?"
"Dahl is in the tropic zone so obviously were going either north or south--and a considerable distance too. If I had some notion in which direction the nightline was I could tell which."
Eventually, they passed over a section of shoreline where there was a rim of ice hugging the domes where they were rimmed by the sea. And then, quite unexpectedly, the air-jet angled downward.
Raych screamed, "Were goin to hit! Were goin to smash up!"
Seldons abdominal muscles tightened and he clutched the arms of his seat. Dors seemed unaffected.
She said, "The pilots up front dont seem alarmed. Well be tunneling."
And, as she said so, the jets wings swept backward and under it and, like a bullet, the air-jet entered a tunnel. Blackness swept back over them in an instant and a moment later the lighting system in the tunnel turned on. The walls of the tunnel snaked past the jet on either side.
"I dont suppose Ill ever be sure they know the tunnel isnt already occupied," muttered Seldon.
"Im sure they had reassurance of a clear tunnel some dozens of kilometers earlier," said Dors. "At any rate, I presume this is the last stage of the journey and soon well know where we are."
She paused and then added, "And I further presume we wont like the knowledge when we have it."
第八十三章
　　“你以前搭乘过喷射机吗，芮奇？”哈里•谢顿问道。
芮奇默默摇了摇头。他正带着惊恐与敬畏交集的心情，望着穹顶猛然从他们脚底掠过。
这使谢顿再度想到，川陀是个多么依赖磁浮捷运与隧道的世界。对一般大众而言，即使长距离旅行也都在地底进行。不论空中旅行在外星世界多么普遍，它在川陀却是一项奢侈。至于像这样一架喷射机……
夫铭是怎样做到的？谢顿实在纳闷。
他透过机窗向外望去，看见了起伏的穹顶，看见了这一带的无际苍翠，以及偶尔出现、无异于丛林的深绿色斑点，还有不时掠过的一些海湾——当太阳从浓厚的云层中暂时露脸时，铅色的海水便会在一瞬间闪闪发光。
铎丝本来在看一本新的历史小说，没有显露多大的兴趣。飞行了大约一小时之后，她突然将胶卷书“喀哒”一声关掉，开口说道：“我希望知道我们正往哪儿去。”
“如果你无法判断，”谢顿说，“那我当然更不行。你在川陀待得比我久。”
“没错，不过只是在里面。”铎丝说，“到了外面这里，只有穹顶在我脚下，我就像腹中的婴儿一般茫然。”
“喔，好吧。想必，夫铭知道他在做什么。”
“我确定他知道，”铎丝以颇为坚信的语气答道，“但那或许和现在的情势毫无关系。你为什么还是认为这些都是他谋划的？”
谢顿扬起眉毛：“被你这么一问，我实在不知道，我只是假设而已。为什么不该是呢？”
“因为不论是谁安排这项行动，都没有特别指示带我和你起走，我就是不信夫铭会忘记我。而且他这次并未亲自前来，像前两次在斯璀璘和麦曲生那样。”
“你不能总是期望他那样做，铎丝，他很可能是分身乏术。应该惊讶的不是这回他没来，而是前两次他竟然来了。”
“假若他无法亲自前来，他会派一个这么显眼、这么高贵的飞行宫殿来吗？”她四下指了指这架大型豪华喷射机。
“也许它只不过是刚好能派上用场。而且他也许做过一番推理，认为没有人会怀疑像这么显眼的东西，会载着两个拼命想要躲避耳目的逃亡者。这就是出了名的负负得正。”
“这也未免太夸张了。他怎么会派个像塔勒斯中士这样的白痴来？”
“这位中士不是白痴，他只足破训练得绝对服从。只要有适当的指示，他百分之百可靠。”
“你看，哈里，我们又兜回来了。为什么他没得到适当的指示？我感到实在不可思议，契特•夫铭竟然只告诉他把你带离达尔，却没有一个字提到我。实在不可思议。”
对于这个问题，谢顿没有任何答案，他的心开始往下沉。
又过了一小时之后，铎丝说：“看来外面好像越来越冷，穹顶上原本青翠的景色已变得枯黄，而且我相信暖气已经打开。”
“这代表什么意义？”
“达尔位于热带，所以显然我们正在向北或向南飞——而且飞了很可观的距离。假如我对昼夜界限在哪个方向有些概念，我便能判断是南是北。’’最后，他们通过一道海岸线，那些滨海穹顶与海水接壤处紧贴着一串冰。
然后，在几乎毫无预兆的情况下，喷射机开始俯冲。
芮奇尖叫道：“我们要坠毁啦！我们会撞得粉碎！”
谢顿感到腹肌收紧，他用力抓住座椅扶手。
铎丝似乎不为所动，她说：“前面的驾驶员似乎并不惊慌，我想，我们是要钻进隧道里。”
就在她这么说的时候，机翼已经开始向后、向下收拢，接着，喷射机就像一颗子弹一样进入隧道。最初的一刹那，他们被一片黑暗笼罩；下一刻，隧道内的照明系统便已开启。从喷射机向外望，隧道两旁的墙壁正蜿蜒地掠过机身。
“我想我永远不会弄懂，他们是怎么知道这条隧道已经空出来。”训顿喃喃说道。
“我确定在好几十公里外，他们便已确认过无人使用。”铎丝说，“无论如何，我推测这是此趟旅程的最后一站，我们很快会知道身在何处。”
她顿了一顿，然后补充道：“而且我还有个预感，在我们知道后，我们不会喜欢那个答案。”
Chapter 84

The air-jet sped out of the tunnel and onto a long runway with a roof so high that it seemed closer to true daylight than anything Seldon had seen since he had left the Imperial Sector.
They came to a halt in a shorter time than Seldon would have expected, but at the price of an uncomfortable pressure forward. Raych, in particular, was crushed against the seat before him and was finding it difficult to breathe till Dorss hand on his shoulder pulled him back slightly.
Sergeant Thalus, impressive and erect, left the jet and moved to the rear, where he opened the door of the passenger compartment and helped the three out, one by one.
Seldon was last. He half-turned as he passed the sergeant, saying, "It was a pleasant trip, Sergeant."
A slow smile spread over the sergeants large face and lifted his mustachioed upper lip. He touched the visor of his cap in what was half a salute and said, "Thank you again, Doctor."
They were then ushered into the backseat of a ground-car of lavish design and the sergeant himself pushed into the front seat and drove the vehicle with a surprisingly light touch.
They passed through wide roadways, flanked by tall, well-designed buildings, all glistening in broad daylight. As elsewhere on Trantor, they heard the distant drone of an Expressway. The walkways were crowded with what were, for the most part, well-dressed people. The surroundings were remarkably--almost excessively--clean.
Seldons sense of security sank further. Dorss misgivings concerning their destination now seemed justified after all. He leaned toward her and said, "Do you think we are back in the Imperial Sector?"
She said, "No, the buildings are more rocooo in the Imperial Sector and theres less Imperial parkishness to this sector--if you know what I mean."
"Then where are we, Dors?
"Well have to ask, Im afraid, Hari."
It was not a long trip and soon they rolled into a car-bay that flanked an imposing four-story structure. A frieze of imaginary animals ran along the top, decorated with strips of warm pink stone. It was an impressive facade with a rather pleasing design.
Seldon said, "That certainly looks rocooo enough."
Dors shrugged uncertainly.
Raych whistled and said in a failing attempt to sound unimpressed, "Hey, look at that fancy place."
Sergeant Thalus gestured to Seldon clearly indicating that he was to follow. Seldon hung back and, also relying on the universal language of gesture, held out both arms, clearly including Dors and Raych. The sergeant hesitated in a slightly hangdog fashion at the impressive pink doorway. His mustache almost seemed to droop.
Then he said gruffly, "All three of you, then. My word of honor holds.--Still, others may not feel obligated by my own obligation, you know."
Seldon nodded. "I hold you responsible for your own deeds only, Sergeant."
The sergeant was clearly moved and, for a moment, his face lightened as though he was considering the possibility of shaking Seldons hand or expressing heartfelt his approval in some other way. He decided against it, however, and stepped onto the bottom step of the flight that led to the door. The stairs immediately began a stately upward movement.
Seldon and Dors stepped after him at once and kept their balance without much trouble. Raych, who was momentarily staggered in surprise, jumped onto the moving stairs after a short run, shoved both hands into his pockets, and whistled carelessly.
The door opened and two women stepped out, one on either side in symmetrical fashion. They were young and attractive. Their dresses, belted tightly about the waist and reaching nearly to their ankles, fell in crisp pleats and rustled when they walked. Both had brown hair that was coiled in thick plaits on either side of their heads. (Seldon found it attractive, but wondered how long it took them each morning to arrange it just so. He had not been aware of so elaborate a coiffure on the women they had passed in the streets.) The two women stared at the newcomers with obvious contempt. Seldon was not surprised. After the days events, he and Dors looked almost as disreputable as Raych.
Yet the women managed to bow decorously and then made a half-turn and gestured inward in perfect unison and with symmetry carefully maintained. (Did they rehearse these things?) It was clear that the three were to enter. They stepped through an elaborate room, cluttered with furniture and decorative items whose use Seldon did not readily understand. The floor was light-colored, springy, and glowed with luminescence. Seldon noted with some embarrassment that their footwear left dusty marks upon it.
And then an inner door was flung open and yet another woman emerged. She was distinctly older than the first two (who sank slowly as she came in, crossing their legs symmetrically as they did so in a way that made Seldon marvel that they could keep their balance; it undoubtedly took a deal of practice). Seldon wondered if he too was expected to display some ritualized form of respect, but since he hadnt the faintest notion of what this might consist of, he merely bowed his head slightly. Dors remained standing erect and, it seemed to Seldon, did so with disdain. Raych was staring open-mouthed in all directions and looked as though he didnt even see the woman who had just entered. She was plump--not fat, but comfortably padded. She wore her hair precisely as the young ladies did and her dress was in the same style, but much more richly ornamented--too much so to suit Seldons aesthetic notions. She was clearly middle-aged and there was a hint of gray in her hair, but the dimples in her cheeks gave her the appearance of having rather more than a dash of youth. Her light brown eyes were merry and on the whole she looked more motherly than old.
She said, "How are you? All of you." (She showed no surprise at the presence of Dors and Raych, but included them easily in her greeting.) "Ive been waiting for you for some time and almost had you on Upperside at Streeling. You are Dr. Hari Seldon, whom Ive been looking forward to meeting. You, I think, must be Dr. Dors Venabili, for you had been reported to be in his company. This young man I fear I do not know, but I am pleased to see him. But we must not spend our time talking, for Im sure you would like to rest first."
"And bathe, Madam," said Dors rather forcefully, "Each of us could use a thorough shower."
"Yes, certainly," said the woman, "and a change in clothing. Especially the young man." She looked down at Raych without any of the look of contempt and disapproval that the two young women had shown. She said, "What is your name, young man?"
"Raych," said Raych in a rather choked and embarrassed voice. He then added experimentally, "Missus."
"What an odd coincidence," said the woman, her eyes sparkling. "An omen, perhaps. My own name is Rashelle. Isnt that odd?--But come. We shall take care of you all. Then there will be plenty of time to have dinner and to talk."
"Wait, Madam," said Dors. "May I ask where we are?"
"Wye, dear. And please call me Rashelle, as you come to feel more friendly. I am always at ease with informality."
Dors stiffened. "Are you surprised that we ask? Isnt it natural that we should want to know where we are?"
Rashelle laughed in a pleasant, tinkling manner. "Really, Dr. Venabili, something must be done about the name of this place. I was not asking a question but making a statement. You asked where you were and I did not ask you why. I told you, Wye. You are in the Wye Sector."
"In Wye?" said Seldon forcibly.
"Yes indeed, Dr. Seldon. Weve wanted you from the day you addressed the Decennial Convention and we are so glad to have you now."
第八十四章
　　喷射机急速飞出隧道，降落在一条很长的跑道上。跑道穹顶上有个非常高的顶棚，自从谢顿离开皇区后，从未见过如此接近真实天日的建筑。
他们不久便停下来，滑行的时问比谢顿预期的还短，不过代价是一股难受的正向冲力。尤其是芮奇，他全身压在前座的椅背上，连呼吸都很困难，直到铎丝放在他肩头的手将他稍向后拉，他才总算松了一口气。
相貌堂堂、身形笔挺的塔勒斯中士离开喷射帆前座，向后面走过来。他打开旅客舱的舱门，扶助他们二人一个个下机。
谢顿最后一个下机。当他经过中士身边时，半转过头来说：“这是一趟愉快的旅程，中士。”
一抹笑容在中士宽大的脸庞缓缓扩散，使他留着胡子的上唇扬了起来。他像敬礼似的碰了一下帽檐，说道：“再次谢谢你，博士。”
接着，他们在引导之下，进入一辆外观华贵的地面车的后座。中士自己钻进前座，以惊人的轻巧动作驾驶着这辆车。
他们穿过几条宽阔的道路，两侧都是高大、壮丽的建筑，全都在充足的日光下闪闪发亮。如同在川陀其他各处一样，他们听到远处有磁浮捷运的嗡嗡声。人行道上挤满了人，大多数穿得很体面。周遭的环境十分清洁，几乎可说清洁得过分。
谢顿的安全感再度下沉。铎丝对于目的地的忧心，如今似乎终于应验。他靠近她说：“你认为我们回到皇区了吗？”
她说：“不。皇区的建筑更具洛可可风格，而本区的庭园皇家风味较少——你该知道我的意思。”
“那么我们在哪里，铎丝？”
“只怕我们得问问，哈里。”
这不是一趟长途旅程，他们很快就来到一个停车坪，旁边是一座富丽堂皇的四层楼建筑。建筑物顶端横亘一道壁缘，上面雕刻着许多想象中的动物，并装饰着粉红暖色的石头排成的条纹。建筑物的外表极为壮观，拥有一个讨人喜欢的外形。
谢顿说：“那看来无疑是洛可可风格。”
铎丝不确定地耸了耸肩。
芮奇吹着口哨，企图表现得毫不在乎：“嘿，看看那个拉风的地方。”不过他装得有点勉强。
塔勒斯中土对谢顿做了一个手势，显然是要他跟着走。谢顿却裹足不前，他伸出双臂，同样借着这种世界通用的语言，明显地表示垃将铎丝与芮奇包括在内。
在壮观的粉红色大门口，中士有点谦卑地迟疑了一下，他的两撇胡子好像几乎要垂下来。
然后他板着脸说：“那么，你们三个一起来吧，我的名誉担保仍然算数。话说回来，你该知道，其他人也许不会认同我。”
谢顿点了点头：“我坚信你一定会对自己的行为负责，中士。”
中士显然有些感动，一时之间，他的脸孔开朗许多，仿佛在考虑该与谢顿握握手，或是以其他方式表达他的衷心赞同。然而，他终究抑止了这些冲动，径自踏上门前台阶的最低一级。那道阶梯立刻开始庄严地缓缓上升。
谢顿与铎丝赶紧随他踏上阶梯，没费多大力气便稳住身形。芮奇惊讶之余曾有短暂的踌躇，经过短距离冲刺才跳上这个活动阶梯。然后他将双手插进口袋，悠闲地吹起口哨。
大门打开后，随即出现两名年轻迷人的女子，以对称的方式各自从一边走出来。她们的衣裳在腰际有皮带紧紧系住，下摆几乎长达脚踝，末端有波浪状的皱褶，走路时会沙沙作响。两人都有一头棕发，在头部两侧结成两条粗辫。（谢顿发觉那很吸引人，却又纳闷她们每天早上得花多少时间梳理。刚才一路上。他并未发觉街上的妇女有如此精致的发型。）
两名女子以明显的轻蔑眼光凝视来客。这点谢顿并不惊讶，经过一天的折腾，他与铎丝看来几乎跟芮奇一样灰头土脸。
然而，两名女子还是以优雅的动作鞠了一躬，然后半转过身，以完美的一致动作向内做个手势，显然是要他们三人进去，动作从头到尾都细心维持着对称。（她们预演过这些事吗？）
他们穿过一个精致的房间，其中零星散布着家具与装饰品，谢顿无法一眼看出它们的功用。地板是浅色的，富有弹性并发出冷光。谢顿注意到三人的鞋子在上面留下不少灰尘，令他感到有些不好意思。
然后，内门突然被推开，随即出现另一名女子，她比先前那两位无疑年长许多。（当她走出来时，两名少女缓缓低下身子，双脚始终维持对称的交叉姿势。谢顿不禁赞叹她们竟然能保持平衡，这无疑需要大量的练习。）
谢顿不知自已是否也该做出某种礼仪性的姿势，但他对这一切毫无概念，他只好微微点了点头。铎丝则保持直立的姿势，在谢顿的感觉中，她的动作似乎带着不屑的意味。芮奇正张大嘴巴东张西望，甚至没注意到刚进来的那名女子。
她的体型丰满——并非肥胖，只有适度的脂肪。她将头发梳成与两名少女同样的发型。她的衣裳也是同一种款式，不过装饰要华丽许多——实在太多了点，令谢倾的审美眼光无法接受。
她显然已步入中年，头发透出些许灰白，但面颊是的两个酒涡为她的外表带来不少青春气息，淡褐色的眼睛也神采奕奕。整体而言，她看来不算老，较像一位慈母。
她说：“你们大家好吗？”（她对铎丝与芮奇的存在末表现惊讶，而且在问候中轻易地将他们包括在内。）“我等待你已有一些时日，当初在斯璀璘的穹顶上差点就请到你。你是哈里•谢顿博士，是我一直期待会见的人。而你，我想，一定是铎丝•凡纳比里博士，因为根据报告，你一直是他的同伴。这个年轻人我恐怕不认识，不过我很高兴见到他。但我们绝不可花太多时间交谈，因为我确定你们希望先休息一下。”
“还有沐浴，夫人，”铎丝以颇为有力的口气说：“我们每个人都得好好洗个澡。”
“是的，当然。”那女子说，“还要换一套衣服，尤其这个年轻人。”她低头望向芮奇，与那两名少女不同的是，她脸上没有任何轻视或不以为然的表情。
她说：“你叫什么名字，年轻人？”
“芮奇，”芮奇以有些嘶哑与尴尬的声音说，接着又试探性地加上称呼，“姑奶奶。”
“多么奇妙的巧合，”那女子说，她的双眼闪烁着光芒。“或许是个兆头。我自己的名字是芮喜尔，这是不是很奇妙？不过别管这个了，我们会好好照顾你们。然后，我们有充分的时间晚餐和叙谈。”
“等一等，女士。”铎丝说，“我能请问我们在哪里吗？”
“卫荷，亲爱的。等你感到更熟悉时，请改口叫我芮喜尔。我总是喜欢不拘礼节。”
铎丝的态度转趋强硬：“‘为何？’我们发问令你惊讶吗？我们想要知道身在何处，这难道不是很自然吗？”
芮喜尔发出一阵愉悦而清脆的笑声：“真的，凡纳比里博士，这地方的名字好歹也得改一改。我并非提出一个问题，而是在做一项陈述。你问你们在哪里，我不是问你‘为何’，而是告诉你‘卫荷’。你们如今在卫荷区。”
“在卫荷？”谢顿使劲说道。
“的确没错，谢顿博士。打从你在十年会议上发表演说那天起，我们就想要把你请来，我们很高兴现在终于得到你了。”
Chapter 85

Actually, it took a full day to rest and unstiffen, to wash and get clean, to obtain new clothes (satiny and rather loose, in the style of Wye), and to sleep a good deal.
It was during the second evening in Wye that there was the dinner that Madam Rashelle had promised.
The table was a large one--too large, considering that there were only four dining: Hari Seldon, Dors Venabili, Raych, and Rashelle. The walls and ceiling were softly illuminated and the colors changed at a rate that caught the eye but not so rapidly as in any way to discommode the mind. The very tablecloth, which was not cloth (Seldon had not made up his mind what it might be), seemed to sparkle.
The servers were many and silent and when the door opened it seemed to Seldon that he caught a glimpse of soldiers, armed and at the ready, outside. The room was a velvet glove, but the iron fist was not far distant. Rashelle was gracious and friendly and had clearly taken a particular liking to Raych, who, she insisted, was to sit next to her. Raych--scrubbed, polished, and shining, all but unrecognizable in his new clothes, with his hair clipped, cleaned, and brushed--scarcely dared to say a word. It was as though he felt his grammar no longer fit his appearance. He was pitifully ill at ease and he watched Dors carefully as she switched from utensil to utensil, trying to match her exactly in every respect. The food was tasty but spicy--to the point where Seldon could not recognize the exact nature of the dishes.
Rashelle, her plump face made happy by her gentle smile and her fine teeth gleaming white, said, "You may think we have Mycogenian additives in the food, but we do not. It is all homegrown in Wye. There is no sector on the planet more self-sufficient than Wye. We labor hard to keep that so."
Seldon nodded gravely and said, "Everything you have given us is first-rate, Rashelle. We are much obliged to you."
And yet within himself he thought the food was not quite up to Mycogenian standards and he felt moreover, as he had earlier muttered to Dors, that he was celebrating his own defeat. Or Hummins defeat, at any rate, and that seemed to him to be the same thing.
After all, he had been captured by Wye, the very possibility that had so concerned Hummin at the time of the incident Upperside. Rashelle said, "Perhaps, in my role as hostess, I may be forgiven if I ask personal questions. Am I correct in assuming that you three do not represent a family; that you, Hari, and you, Dors, are not married and that Raych is not your son?"
"The three of us are not related in any way," said Seldon. "Raych was born on Trantor, I on Helicon, Dors on Cinna."
"And how did you all meet, then?"
Seldon explained briefly and with as little detail as he could manage. "Theres nothing romantic or significant in the meetings," he added.
"Yet I am given to understand that you raised difficulties with my personal aide, Sergeant Thalus, when he wanted to take only you out of Dahl."
Seldon said gravely, "I had grown fond of Dors and Raych and did not wish to be separated from them."
Rashelle smiled and said, "You are a sentimental man, I see."
"Yes, I am. Sentimental. And puzzled too."
"Puzzled?"
"Why yes. And since you were so kind as to ask personal questions of us, may I ask one as well?"
"Of course, my dear Hari. Ask anything you please."
"When we first arrived, you said that Wye has wanted me from the day I addressed the Decennial Convention. For what reason might that be?"
"Surely, you are not so simple as not to know. We want you for your psychohistory."
"That much I do understand. But what makes you think that having me means you have psychohistory?"
"Surely, you have not been so careless as to lose it."
"Worse, Rashelle. I have never had it."
Rashelles face dimpled. "But you said you had it in your talk. Not that I understood your talk. I am not a mathematician. I hate numbers. But I have in my employ mathematicians who have explained to me what it is you said."
"In that case, my dear Rashelle, you must listen more closely. I can well imagine they have told you that I have proven that psychohistorical predictions are conceivable, but surely they must also have told you that they are not practical."
"I cant believe that, Hari. The very next day, you were called into an audience with that pseudo-Emperor, Cleon."
"The pseudo-Emperor?" murmured Dors ironically.
"Why yes," said Rashelle as though she was answering a serious question. "Pseudo-Emperor. He has no true claim to the throne."
"Rashelle," said Seldon, brushing that aside a bit impatiently, "I told Cleon exactly what I have just told you and he let me go."
Now Rashelle did nor smile. A small edge crept into her voice. "Yes, he let you go the way the cat in the fable lets a mouse go. He has been pursuing you ever since--in Streeling, in Mycogen, in Dahl. He would pursue you here if he dared. But come now--our serious talk is too serious. Let us enjoy ourselves. Let us have music."
And at her words, there suddenly sounded a soft but joyous instrumental melody. She leaned toward Raych and said softly, "My boy, if you are not at ease with the fork, use your spoon or your fingers. I wont mind."
Raych said, "Yes, mum," and swallowed hard, but Dors caught his eye and her lips silently mouthed: "Fork."
He remained with his fork.
Dors said, "The music is lovely, Madam"--she pointedly rejected the familiar form of address "but it must not he allowed to distract us. There is the thought in my mind that the pursuer in all those places might have been in the employ of the Wye Sector. Surely, you would not be so well acquainted with events if Wye were not the prime mover."
Rashelle laughed aloud. "Wye has its eyes and ears everywhere, of course, but we were not the pursuers. Had we been, you would have been picked up without fail--as you were in Dahl finally when, indeed, we were the pursuers. When, however, there is a pursuit that fails, a grasping hand that misses, you may be sure that it is Demerzel."
"Do you think so little of Demerzel?" murmured Dors.
"Yes. Does that surprise you? We have beaten him."
"You? Or the Wye Sector?"
"The sector, of course, but insofar as Wye is the victor, then I am the victor."
"How strange," said Dors. "There seems to be a prevalent opinion throughout Trantor that the inhabitants of Wye have nothing to do with victory, with defeat, or with anything else. It is felt that there is but one will and one fist in Wye and that is that of the Mayor. Surely, you--or any other Wyan--weigh nothing in comparison."
Rashelle smiled broadly. She paused to look at Raych benevolently and to pinch his cheek, then said, "If you believe that our Mayor is an autocrat and that there is but one will that sways Wye, then perhaps you are right. But, even so, I can still use the personal pronoun, for my will is of account."
"Why yours?" said Seldon.
"Why not?" said Rashelle as the servers began clearing the table. "I am the Mayor of Wye."
第八十五章
　　事实上，休息、松弛，把全身洗干净，换上新衣服（质料光滑且有些宽松，这是卫荷服装的特色），再好好睡上一觉，花了他们一整天的时间。
来到卫荷的第二天傍晚，芮喜尔女士说好的晚餐才有机会举行。
餐桌相当大——其实太大了，因为总其只有四个人进餐：哈里•谢顿、铎丝•凡纳比里、芮奇与芮喜尔。墙壁与屋顶都打上柔和的灯光，光线的色彩不停变化，其速率足以吸引目光，却不至于使人心浮气躁。而桌布（其实并非布料，谢顿心中尚未判定它是什么）似乎会闪闪发亮。
服侍进餐的仆人很多，全都沉默不语。当门打开的时候，谢顿似乎瞥见外面站着一些士兵，一律全副武装并荷枪实弹。这个房间就像个天鹅绒手套，那只铁拳却在不远的地方。
芮喜尔表现得殷勤而亲切，而且显然对芮奇特别喜爱，还坚持要他坐在旁边。
芮奇已经彻底洗干净，显得焕然一新。穿上新衣服，头发经过修剪、清洗、梳理之后，几乎使人认不出他来。现在他简直不敢说一个字，似乎感到他的文法不再符合自己的外表。他觉得自卑而不自在，每当铎丝的手在餐具间游移，他都会仔细望着她，试图每一方面都与她的动作完全一致：
食物可口但味道过重，以致谢顿无法分辨每道荣究竟是什么做的。
芮喜尔带着温柔的微笑，令她丰满的脸颊显得很开心．她美丽的牙齿闪着雪白的晶光。“你也许以为我们在食物中放了麦曲生添加物，其实我们没有，这些全是卫荷自己种植的。在这颗行星上，没有任何一区比卫荷更自给自足：我们花费很大心力保持如此。”
谢顿严肃地点了点头：“你招待我们的每样东西部是一流的，芮喜尔，我们十分感谢你。”
然而在他心中，却认为这些食物还是比不上麦曲生的水平。他更有一种感觉，正如他早先对铎丝说过的，他正在庆祝自己的失败。或者至少是夫锦的失败，而在他看来，这两者似乎是同一回事。
到头来，他还是被卫荷逮捕。当初，在穹顶上的事件发生后，夫铭曾经非常担心这个可能性。
芮喜尔说：“或许，我既然身为女主人，如果问些私人问题也请原凉。我猜测你们三位不是一家人；你，哈里，和你，铎丝，不是夫妻，而芮奇不是你们的儿子，这个猜测是否正确？”
“我们三个人没有任何关系，”谢顿说．“芮奇生在川陀，我生在赫利肯。铎丝生在锡纳。”
“那么，你们三人是怎样相遇的？”
谢顿做了简短的解释，尽可能不提任何细节。“相遇的过程没有任何浪漫或重要的情节。”他补充道。
“然而据我了解，当我的贴身侍卫——塔勒斯中士，只要将你一人带离达尔时，你曾对他百般刁难。”
谢顿以严肃的口吻说：“我越来越喜欢铎丝和芮奇，不希望跟他们分开。”
芮喜尔微微一笑：“我懂了，你是个感情丰富的男人。”
“没错，我的确是。感情丰富，而且十分困惑。”
“困惑？”
“可不是吗。既然你这么亲切，问了我们一些私人问题，我是否也能反问你一个问题？”
“当然，亲爱的哈里，你喜欢问什么都行。”
“当我们刚抵达的时候，你说打从我在十年会议上发表演说那天起，卫荷就想要把我请来。这是为了什么？”
“哦，你不会单纯到连这点都不知道。我们要你是为了你的心理史学。”
“这点我还了解。然而是什么使你认为，得到我就代表得到心理史学？”
“不用说，你不会粗心到把它给弄丢了。”
“事实上更糟，芮喜尔，我从未拥有它。”
芮喜尔脸上现出酒涡：“但你在演说中曾说你拥有它。并非我听得懂你的演说，我不是数学家，我痛恨数字。可是我雇用了不少数学家，他们对我解释过你所说的内容。”
“这样说来，亲爱的芮喜尔，你必须听得更仔细些。我绝对能想象他们曾经告诉你，说我证明出心理史学的预测是可能的，但他们当然也告诉过你，那实际上是不可行的。”
“我不相信，哈里。第二天你就被召见，去觐见那个伪皇帝，克里昂。”
“伪皇帝？”铎丝以讽刺的口吻喃喃说道。
“可不是吗。”芮喜尔仿佛在回答一个严肃的问题，“伪皇帝，他没有继承皇位的真正资格。”
“芮喜尔，”谢顿有点不耐烦地把那个问题推到一边，“我告诉克里昂的话，和我刚才对你说的一模一样，然后他就让我走了。”
这回阿喜尔并未露出笑容，她的声音变得有点尖锐：“没错，他让你走了，以寓言中猫放老鼠走的那种方式。从此以后，他就一直在追捕你——在斯璀璘，在麦曲生，在达尔。要是他有胆的话，他还会追到这里来。不过别谈这些了——我们的严肃话题变得太严肃了。让我们享受一下，来点音乐吧。”
话音刚落，便突然响起轻柔悦耳的乐器旋律。她倚向芮奇，轻声说道：“孩子，如果你用叉子感到不自在，就用你的汤匙，或是用手指，我不会介意。”
芮奇说：“好的，女士。”而且毫无保留地接受了。
但铎丝捕捉到他的目光，并做出一组无声的嘴形：“叉了。”
于是他没将叉子丢开。
铎丝说：“这音乐真可爱，女士。”她刻意拒绝用亲昵的称呼，“可是它一定不能使我们开心。我心中有个想法，就是各处的追捕者可能都受雇于卫荷区。不用说，假如卫荷不是主谋，你也不会对那些事件了如指掌。”
芮喜尔纵声大笑：“当然，卫荷的耳目遍布各个角落，但我们不是追捕者。若是我们的话，你们早就被一举捉来了——就像你们在达尔时那样，那一次，我们终于真正成为追捕者。然而，当追捕的行动失败、伸出的爪子抓空时，你便可确定那是丹莫茨尔主使的。”
“你如此看轻丹莫茨尔？”铎丝喃喃问道。
“是的，这令你惊讶吗？我们击败了他。”
“你？或是卫荷区？”
“当然是奉区，但只要卫荷是胜利者，那么我就是胜利者。”
“多奇怪啊，”铎丝说，“整个川陀似乎盛行着一种见解，那就是卫荷的居民和胜利、失败，或是任何其他事情都毫无关系。在我们的感觉中，卫荷只有一个意志，一只拳头，而那是属于区长所有。不用说，你，或者其他卫荷人，比较之下根本无足轻重。”
芮喜尔露出开怀的笑容。她没有立即叫答，向是以慈祥的眼光望向芮奇，又掐掐他的脸颊，这才说道：“如果你相信我们的区长是个独裁者，而且，只有一个意志支配着卫荷，那么或许你是对的。可是，即使如此，我仍有资格用人称代词代表卫荷，因为我的意志举足轻重。”
“为什么？”谢顿说。
“为什么不呢？”当仆人开始收拾餐桌时，芮喜尔说，“我，就是卫荷区长。”
Chapter 86
It was Raych who was the first to react to the statement.
Quite forgetting the cloak of civility that sat upon him so uncomfortably, he laughed raucously and said, "Hey, lady, ya cant be Mayor. Mayors is guys."
Rashelle looked at him good-naturedly and said in a perfect imitation of his tone of voice, "Hey, kid, some Mayors is guys and some Mayors is dames. Put that under your lid and let it bubble."
Raychs eyes protruded and he seemed stunned. Finally he managed to say, "Hey, ya talk regular, lady."
"Sure thing. Regular as ya want," said Rashelle, still smiling.
Seldon cleared his throat and said, "Thats quite an accent you have, Rashelle."
Rashelle tossed her head slightly. "I havent had occasion to use it in many years, but one never forgets. I once had a friend, a good friend, who was a Dahlite--when I was very young." She sighed. "He didnt speak that way, of course--he was quite intelligent--but he could do so if he wished and he taught me. It was exciting to talk so with him. It created a world that excluded our surroundings. It was wonderful. It was also impossible. My father made that plain. And now along comes this young rascal, Raych, to remind me of those long-ago days. He has the accent, the eyes, the impudent cast of countenance, and in six years or so he will be a delight and terror to the young women. Wont you, Raych?"
Raych said, "I dunno, lady--uh, mum."
"Im sure you will and you will come to look very much like my ... old friend and it will be much more comfortable for me not to see you then. And now, dinners over and its time for you to go to your room, Raych. You can watch holovision for a while if you wish. I dont suppose you read."
Raych reddened. "Im gonna read someday. Master Seldon says Im gonna."
"Then Im sure you will."
A young woman approached Raych, curtsying respectfully in Rashelles direction.
Seldon had not seen the signal that had summoned her.
Raych said, "Cant I stay with Master Seldon and Missus Venabili?"
"Youll see them later," said Rashelle gently, "but Master and Missus and I have to talk right now--so you must go."
Dors mouthed a firm "Go!" at Raych and with a grimace the boy slid out of his chair and followed the attendant.
Rashelle turned to Seldon and Dors once Raych was gone and said, "The boy will be safe, of course, and treated well. Please have no fears about that. And I will be safe too. As my woman approached just now, so will a dozen armed men--and much more rapidly--when summoned. I want you to understand that."
Seldon said evenly, "We are in no way thinking of attacking you, Rashelle--or must I now say, Madam Mayor?"
"Still Rashelle. I am given to understand that you are a wrestler of sorts, Hari, and you, Dors, are very skillful with the knives we have removed from your room. I dont want you to rely uselessly on your skills, since I want Hari alive, unharmed, and friendly."
"It is quite well understood, Madam Mayor," said Dors, her lack of friendship uncompromised, "that the ruler of Wye, now and for the past forty years, is Mannix, Fourth of that Name, and that he is still alive and in full possession of his faculties. Who, then, are you really?"
"Exactly who I say I am, Dors. Mannix IV is my father. He is, as you say, still alive and in possession of his faculties. In the eyes of the Emperor and of all the Empire, he is Mayor of Wye, but he is weary of the strains of power and is willing, at last, to let them slip into my hands, which are just as willing to receive them. I am his only child and I was brought up all my life to rule. My father is therefore Mayor in law and name, but I am Mayor in fact. It is to me, now, that the armed forces of Wye have sworn allegiance and in Wye that is all that counts."
Seldon nodded. "Let it be as you say. But even so, whether it is Mayor Mannix IV or Mayor Rashelle I--it is the First, I suppose--there is no purpose in your holding me. I have told you that I dont have a workable psychohistory and I do not think that either I or anyone else will ever have one. I have told that to the Emperor. I am of no use either to you or to him."
Rashelle said, "How naive you are. Do you know the history of the Empire?"
Seldon shook his head. "I have recently come to wish that I knew it much better."
Dors said dryly, "I know Imperial history quite well, though the pre-Imperial age is my specialty, Madam Mayor. But what does it matter whether we do or do not?"
"If you know your history, you know that the House of Wye is ancient and honorable and is descended from the Dacian dynasty."
Dors said, "The Dacians ruled five thousand years ago. The number of their descendants in the hundred and fifty generations that have lived and died since then may number half the population of the Galaxy--if all genealogical claims, however outrageous, are accepted."
"Our genealogical claims, Dr. Venabili"--Rashelles tone of voice was, for the first time, cold and unfriendly and her eyes flashed like steel--"are not outrageous. They are fully documented. The House of Wye has maintained itself consistently in positions of power through all those generations and there have been occasions when we have held the Imperial throne and have ruled as Emperors."
"The history book-films," said Dors, "usually refer to the Wye rulers as anti-Emperors, never recognized by the bulk of the Empire."
"It depends on who writes the history book-films. In the future, we will, for the throne which has been ours will be ours again."
"To accomplish that, you must bring about civil war."
"There wont be much risk of that," said Rashelle. She was smiling again. "That is what I must explain to you because I want Dr. Seldons help in preventing such a catastrophe. My father, Mannix IV, has been a man of peace all his life. He has been loyal to whomever it might be that ruled in the Imperial Palace and he has kept Wye a prosperous and strong pillar of the Trantorian economy for the good of all the Empire."
"I dont know that the Emperor has ever trusted him any the more for all that," said Dors.
"Im sure that is so," said Rashelle calmly, "for the Emperors that have occupied the Palace in my fathers time have known themselves to be usurpers of a usurping line. Usurpers cannot afford to trust the true rulers. And yet my father has kept the peace. He has, of course, developed and trained a magnificent security force to maintain the peace, prosperity, and stability of the sector and the Imperial authorities have allowed this because they wanted Wye peaceful, prosperous, stable--and loyal."
"But is it loyal?" said Dors.
"To the true Emperor, of course," said Rashelle, "and we have now reached the stage where our strength is such that we can take over the government quickly--in a lightning stroke, in fact--and before one can say civil war there will be a true Emperor--or Empress, if you prefer--and Trantor will be as peaceful as before."
Dors shook her head. "May I enlighten you? As a historian?"
"I am always willing to listen." And she inclined her head ever so slightly toward Dors.
"Whatever size your security force may be, however well-trained and well-equipped, they cannot possibly equal in size and strength the Imperial forces backed by twenty-five million worlds."
"Ah, but you have put your finger on the usurpers weakness, Dr. Venabili. There are twenty-five million worlds, with the Imperial forces scattered over them. Those forces are thinned out over incalculable space, under uncounted officers, none of them particularly ready for any action outside their own Provinces, many ready for action in their own interest rather than in the Empires. Our forces, on the other hand, are all here, all on Trantor. We can act and conclude before the distant generals and admirals can get it through their heads that they are needed."
"But that response will come--and with irresistible force."
"Are you certain of that?" said Rashelle. "We will be in the Palace. Trantor will be ours and at peace. Why should the Imperial forces stir when, by minding their own business, each petty military leader can have his own world to rule, his own Province?"
"But is that what you want?" asked Seldon wonderingly. "Are you telling me that you look forward to ruling over an Empire that will break up into splinters?"
Rashelle said, "That is exactly right. I would rule over Trantor, over its outlying space settlements, over the few nearby planetary systems that are part of the Trantorian Province. I would much rather be Emperor of Trantor than Emperor of the Galaxy."
"You would be satisfied with Trantor only," said Dors in tones of the deepest disbelief.
"Why not?" said Rashelle, suddenly ablaze. She leaned forward eagerly, both hands pressed palms-down on the table. "That is what my father has been planning for forty years. He is only clinging to life now to witness its fulfillment. Why do we need millions of worlds, distant worlds that mean nothing to us, that weaken us, that draw our forces far away from us into meaningless cubic parsecs of space, that drown us in administrative chaos, that ruin us with their endless quarrels and problems when they are all distant nothings as far as we are concerned? Our own populous world--our own planetary city--is Galaxy enough for us. We have all we need to support ourselves. As for the rest of the Galaxy, let it splinter. Every petty militarist can have his own splinter. They neednt fight. There will be enough for all."
"But they will fight, just the same," said Dors. "Each will refuse to be satisfied with his Province. Each will feel that his neighbor is not satisfied with his Province. Each will feel insecure and will dream of Galactic rule as the only guarantee of safety. This is certain, Madam Empress of Nothing. There will be endless wars into which you and Trantor will be inevitably drawn--to the ruin of all."
Rashelle said with clear contempt, "So it might seem, if one could see no farther than you do, if one relied on the ordinary lessons of history."
"What is there to see farther?" retorted Dors. "What is one to rely on beyond the lessons of history?"
"What lies beyond?" said Rashelle. "Why, he."
And her arm shot outward, her index finger jabbing toward Seldon.
"Me?" said Seldon. "I have already told you that psychohistory--"
Rashelle said, "Do not repeat what you have already said, my good Dr. Seldon. We gain nothing by that.--Do you think, Dr. Venabili, that my father was never aware of the danger of endless civil war? Do you think he did not bend his powerful mind to thinking of some way to prevent that? He has been prepared at any time these last ten years to take over the Empire in a day. It needed only the assurance of security beyond victory."
"Which you cant have," said Dors.
"Which we had the moment we heard of Dr. Seldons paper at the Decennial Convention. I saw at once that that was what we needed. My father was too old to see the significance at once. When I explained it, however, he saw it too and it was then that he formally transferred his power to me. So it is to you, Hari, that I owe my position and to you I will owe my greater position in the future."
"I keep telling you that it cannot--" began Seldon with deep annoyance.
"It is not important what can or cannot be done. What is important is what people will or will not believe can be done. They will believe you, Hari, when you tell them the psychohistoric prediction is that Trantor can rule itself and that the Provinces can become Kingdoms that will live together in peace."
"I will make no such prediction," said Seldon, "in the absence of true psychohistory. I wont play the charlatan. If you want something like that, you say it."
"Now, Hari. They wont believe me. Its you they will believe. The great mathematician. Why not oblige them?"
"As it happens," said Seldon "the Emperor also thought to use me as a source of self-serving prophecies. I refused to do it for him, so do you think I will agree to do it for you?"
Rashelle was silent for a while and when she spoke again her voice had lost its intense excitement and became almost coaxing.
"Hari," she said, "think a little of the difference between Cleon and myself. What Cleon undoubtedly wanted from you was propaganda to preserve his throne. It would be useless to give him that, for the throne cant be preserved. Dont you know that the Galactic Empire is in a state of decay, that it cannot endure for much longer? Trantor itself is slowly sliding into ruin because of the ever-increasing weight of administering twenty-five million worlds. Whats ahead of us is breakup and civil war, no matter what you do for Cleon."
Seldon said, "I have heard something like this said. It may even be true, but what then?"
"Well then, help it break into fragments without any war. Help me take Trantor. Help me establish a firm government over a realm small enough to be ruled efficiently. Let me give freedom to the rest of the Galaxy, each portion to go its own way according to its own customs and cultures. The Galaxy will become a working whole again through the free agencies of trade, tourism, and communication and the fate of cracking into disaster under the present rule of force that barely holds it together will be averted. My ambition is moderate indeed; one world, not millions; peace, not war; freedom, not slavery. Think about it and help me."
Seldon said, "Why should the Galaxy believe me any more than they would believe you? They dont know me and which of our fleet commanders will be impressed by the mere word psychohistory?"
"You wont be believed now, but I dont ask for action now. The House of Wye, having waited thousands of years, can wait thousands of days more. Cooperate with me and I will make your name famous. I will make the promise of psychohistory glow through all the worlds and at the proper time, when I judge the movement to be the chosen moment, you will pronounce your prediction and we will strike. Then, in a twinkling of history, the Galaxy will exist under a New Order that will render it stable and happy for eons. Come now, Hari, can you refuse me?"
Overthrow
THALUS, EMMER-- ... A sergeant in the armed security forces of the Wye Sector of ancient Trantor ...
... Aside from these totally unremarkable vital statistics, nothing is known of the man except that on one occasion he held the fate of the Galaxy in his fist.
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第八十六章
　　对这话第一个有反应的是芮奇。他几乎忘了强行加诸其上的斯文外衣，发出一阵刺耳的笑声之后，他说：“嘿，大姐，你不可能是区长，区长都是哥儿们。”
芮喜尔和蔼地望着他，惟妙惟肖地模仿他的腔调说：“嘿，小子，有些区长是哥儿们，有些区长是娘儿们。把这点放在你的脑袋瓜里，让它好好煮一煮。”
芮奇双眼凸起，似乎吓了一大跳。最后，他总算吐出一句话：“嘿，你在说普通话，大姐。”
“是呀，你要多普通就多普通。”芮喜尔仍然面带笑容。
谢顿清了清喉咙，说道：“你口音很地道，芮喜尔。”
芮喜尔稍微抬起头：“许多年来．我一直没机会用，不过我永远不会忘记。我曾经有个朋友，一个好朋友，他是个达尔人——那是我非常年轻的时候。”她叹息一声，“当然，他并不那样讲话——他相当聪明能干——但他懂这种口音，而他也教了我。跟他那样说话实在令人兴奋，等于创造了一个世界，将我们周遭的一切全部都排除在外。那实在太美妙，但也是一件不可能的事，家父的立场十分明白。如今，来了这个小淘气，芮奇，使我想起那些遥远的时光。他有那种口音，那种眼神，那种叛逆的表情，差不多六年以后，他就会成为少女心目中又爱又怕的对象。你会不会，芮奇？”
芮奇说：“我不知——呃，女士。”
“我确定你会的，而且你会变得非常像我的……老朋友。到那个时候，为了我自己着想．我最好别再见到你。现在晚餐已经结束，你该回到自己的房间去了，芮奇，如果你有兴趣，可以看一会儿全息电视。我猜想你不会读书。”
芮奇涨红了脸：“总有一天我会改，谢顿老爷说我会的。”
“那么我确信你一定会。”
一名年轻女子向芮奇走来，同时朝芮喜尔的方向尊敬地屈膝行礼。谢顿刚才并未来见到召唤她的讯号。
芮奇说：“我不能留下陪谢顿老爷和凡纳比里姑奶奶吗？”
“等一下你会见到他们，”芮喜尔温柔地说．“可是老爷、姑奶奶和我现在得谈一谈——所以你必须离开。”
铎丝对芮奇冒出一声坚决有力的“去！”男孩做了一个鬼脸，随即滑下椅子，跟着那名仆人走了。
芮奇离开后，芮喜尔便转向谢顿与铎丝，说道：“当然，那孩子会很安全，而且会受到良好待遇，这点请别担心。我自己也会很安全，正如我的女侍刚才走来那样，在我召唤之下，十几名武装卫士也能随传随到——而且动作快得多。我要你们了解这点。”
谢顿以平稳的语气说：“我们绝对没有想要攻击你，芮喜尔…或是我现在得说‘区长女士’？”
“还是叫我芮喜尔。据我所知，你可算一名摔跤选手，哈里；而你，铎丝，双刀耍得非常熟练，不过我们已将两把刀从你房间取走。我不要你们徒劳地仰赖你们的本事，因为我要哈里活着，你毫发无损。而且态度友善。”
“有一点大家十分了解，区长女士，”铎丝说，她摆明了拒绝表现友善态度。“那就是过去四十年来，直到今天为止，卫荷的统治者都是曼尼克斯四世。他如今仍旧活着，而且神智完全清醒。所以说——你究竟是什么人？”
“我正是自称的那个人，铎丝。曼尼克斯四世是我的父亲，正如你所说，他仍旧活着，而且神智清醒。在皇帝以及整个帝国的眼中，他才是卫荷的区长，但他厌倦了为权力而心力交瘁，终于甘愿让它溜到我手中，而我同样甘愿接受它。我是他的独生女，从小被教养成一名统治者。因此，家父是法律上与名义上的区长，而我则是实际上的区长。如今，卫荷军队宣誓效忠的对象是我，而在卫荷，这才是唯一算数的事。”
谢顿点了点头：“姑且接受你所说的一切。但即使如此，不论区长是曼尼克斯四世或芮喜尔一世——我想是一世吧——你们留置我都没有任何意义。我已经告诉你，我并未掌握一个可行的心理史学，也不认为我自己或其他人将来能掌握它。我曾经对皇上这样说过，而我对你和对他同样没有用。”
芮喜尔说：“你多么天真啊。你可知道帝国的历史吗？”
谢顿摇了摇头：“最近我才希望自己能对它多有些了解。”
铎丝以冷淡的口气说：“区长女士，虽然我的专长是在前帝国时代，但我对帝国历史相当了解。不过．我们是否了解又有什么关系呢？”
“如果你知道这些历史，就该知道卫荷世族是个古老而光荣的家族，而且是达斯皇朝的后裔。”
铎丝说：“达斯皇朝的统治是五千年前的事。从那时算起，过去一百五十代以来，他们的后人生生死死，加起来或许占了银河人数的一半——假如所有宗谱，不论多荒诞不经，全部计算在内的话。”
“我们的宗谱绝非荒诞不经，凡纳比里博士，”芮喜尔的语调首次变得冰冷而不友善，她的一双眼睛像精钢般闪烁。“它有完整的档案可供查证。在过去这些世代中，卫荷世族一贯保持掌权的地位。而且过去曾有一段时期，我们的确掌握皇位，以皇帝的名义统治帝国。”
“在历史胶卷书中，”铎丝说，“通常都将卫荷的统治者称为‘反帝’，他们从来不为帝国的大多数所承认。”
“那要看由谁撰写历史胶卷书。未来，将由我们执笔，因为曾是我们的皇位将重归我们所有。”
“想要达到这个目的，你必须发动一场内战。”
“不会有太大的风险。”芮喜尔再度露出笑容，“这就是我必须向你们解释的，因为我需要谢顿博士的帮助，来避免这样的一场大祸。我的父亲，曼尼克斯四世，一生都是一位和平主义者。不论是什么人统治着皇宫，他都一律效忠。而且为了整个帝国的利益，他始终保持卫荷的繁荣和强盛，使卫荷一直是川陀经济的重要支柱。”
“我似乎没听过皇上曾因此更信任他。”铎丝说。
“的确没有，”芮喜尔平静地说，“因为在家父的时代，占领皇宫的皇帝都知道自己是代代相传的篡位者。篡位者自然不敢信任真正的统治者。然而，家父一直以和为贵。当然，他建立并训练了一支强大的安全武力，用以维系本区的和平、繁荣与稳定。帝国当局一向默许这事，因为他们想要卫荷保持和平、繁荣、稳定——以及忠诚。”
“可是它忠诚吗？”锋丝说。
“对真正的皇帝，当然如此。”芮喜尔说，“我们现在已达成熟阶段，我们的力量能让我们迅速接收政府——事实上，是以迅雷不及掩耳的一击。在任何人能声称这是‘内战’之前，就会出现一位真正的皇帝——或是女皇，如果你喜欢这样说——而川陀将和过去同样太平。”
详丝摇了摇头：“我能开导你一下吗？以历史学家的身份？”
“我一向乐意受教。”她朝铎丝的方向稍微凑过头去。
“不论你的安全武力规模有多大，不论训练、装备如何精良，帝国武力却有两千五百万个世界做后盾，你们不可能比得上它的规模和力量。”
“啊，但你刚好指出了篡位者的弱点，凡纳比里博士。帝国武力分散在两千五百万个世界上，在无际的太空中，无数的军官统率下，那些兵力已被稀释殆尽。没有世界特别备置好出兵本身星省之外的兵力，而且许多都不顾帝国的利益，只愿意为自己的利益采取行动。反之，我们的部队都在此地，全部在川陀。在远方的将领、将军风闻需要他们发兵救援之前，他们便能迅速采取行动，迅速完成任务。”
“可是反应将随之而至——带着无可抵御的武力。”
“你确定这点吗？”芮喜尔说，“那时我们将坐镇皇宫，川陀将会是我们的，而且处于太平状态。帝国军队如果只管自己的事，每个小小的军事领袖都能统治自己的世界、自己的星省，他们为什么要来搅和？”
“那就是你所要的结果吗？”谢顿以好奇的口气问道，“你是在告诉我，你期望统治一个将会四分五裂的帝国？”
“正是如此。我将统治川陀，统治它外围的太空殖民地，统治属于川陀星省的几个邻近行星系。我将更像川陀帝国的皇帝，而不是整个银河的皇帝。”
“你会满足于仅仅拥有川陀？”铎丝以绝不相信的口吻说。
“为何不会？”芮喜尔突然变得慷慨激昂，她急切地将身子向前倾，双手手掌压在餐桌上。“那正是家父谋划了四十年的事。他如今苟延残喘，只为亲眼目睹它的实现。我们为什么需要千万个世界？遥远的世界对我们没有意义，只会削弱我们的实力；只会把我们的武力从身边抽走，洒向毫无意义的太空；只会将我们淹没在行政管理的混沌中；只会以无休无止的争吵和问题把我们拖垮——对我们而言，它们根本等于不存在。我们自己这个人口众多的世界——我们自己的行星都会——就已足以作为我们的银河；我们拥有自给自足的一切。至于银河其他部分，就让它四分五裂吧。每个小小军头都能拥有自己的一小片，他们无需争斗，银河足够让他们分。”
“可是无论如何，他们还是会彼此争斗。”铎丝说，“每一个都不肯满足于自己的星省；每一个都恐惧近邻不满足于他们的星省；每一个都感到不安全，而梦想统治银河才是唯一的安全保证。这是确定会发生的，我的虚无女皇。从此将会有无穷无尽的战争，你和你的川陀必然会被卷进去——同归于尽。”
芮喜尔以明显的轻蔑口吻说：“看来似乎如此，如果我们无法看得比你更远，如果我们仅仅凭借普通的历史教训。”
“还有什么能看得更远？”铎丝回嘴道，“除了历史的教训之外，我们还能凭借什么？”
“除此之外还有什么？”芮喜尔说，“哈，还有他！”
她的手臂猛然伸出，她的食指盲直指向谢顿。
“我？”谢顿说，“我已经告诉你心理史学……”
芮喜尔说：“别再重复你说过的话，我的好谢顿博士，它对我们毫无用处——凡纳比里博士，难道你认为家父从未体会无穷内战的危险？你以为他并末倾注过全部心力，设法想出一个防范之道？过去十年来，他随时准备好在一天之内接收帝国。唯一还需要的，就是胜利之外的安全保障。”
“那是你们无法掌握的。”铎丝说。
“在听到谢顿博士于十年会议中发表论文的那一刻，我们便掌握了它，我马上看出那正是我们需要的。家父由于年事过高，无法立刻看出它的重要性。然而，经过我一番解释之后，他也看出来了。就是在那个时候，他才正式将他的权力转移给我。所以说，我的地位是拜你之赐，哈里；而在未来，我更高的地位还是要拜你之赐。”
“我一直在告诉你，它不能……”谢顿以极不耐烦的口气说了半句。
“什么能做或不能做并不重要，重要的是人民相不相信什么事是能做得到的。当你告诉他们，心理史学预测的是川陀能够自我统治，每个星省可以变成一个王国，而所有的王国将和平共处，哈里，他们会相信你的。”
“在没有真正掌握到心理史学之前，”谢顿说，“我不会做这种预测，我不要扮演欺世的郎中。如果你要公布这种事，你自己去说。”
“算了，哈里，他们不会相信我的。他们会相信的是你，一位大数学家。为什么不满足他们呢？”
“说来很巧，”谢顿说，“皇上也曾经想到，利用我来散播一些自我实现的预言。我拒绝为他做这种事，你以为我会同意为你这样做吗？”
芮喜尔沉默了一会儿，当她再度开口的时候，她的声音不再激动无比，变得几乎是好言相劝。
“哈里，”她说，“稍微想想克里昂和我自己的不同之处。克里昂想从你身上得到的，无疑只是保障皇位的一种宣传。满足他这一点毫无用处，因为他的皇位根本保不住。难道你不知道，银河帝国处于一种衰败的状态，已经无法再支持多久吗？管理两千五百万个世界的负担越来越沉重，使川陀本身正在逐渐步向灭亡。不论你为克里昂做些什么，等在我们前面的只是分裂和内战。”
谢顿说：“我曾听过一些类似的话，它甚至有可能是真的，但是又怎么样？”
“所以说，应该帮它在毫无战争的状况下分裂。帮助我取得川陀；帮助我建立一个稳固的政府，统治一个足够小、足以有效治理的领域。让我把自由还给银河各个角落，让每一部分依照自身的习俗与文化各行其是。银河将会借着贸易、观光和通讯的自由媒介，再度变成一个活生生的整体。如此即可避免银河在目前这个几乎无法维系的统治力量之下，完全崩溃瓦解的悲惨命运。我的野心实在有限：一个世界，而不是千万个；和平，而不是战争；自由，而不是奴役。仔细想想，答应帮助我吧。”
谢顿说：“银河黎民既然不相信你，又为什么会相信我？他们根本不认识我。而且，我们的那些舰队指挥官，有哪个听到‘心理史学’几个字便会动容？”
“现在不会有人相信你，但我不需要现在行动。卫荷世族已等待了数千年，还可以再多等数千日。只要跟我合作，我会让你的名字响彻银河，我会让每个世界都知道心理史学成功在望。在适当的时候，当我判断时机成熟的那一刻，你就发表你的预测，而我们则发动攻击。然后，在历史的一转瞬间，银河便会处于一个新秩序之下，为它带来永永远远的稳定和幸福。来吧，哈里，你能拒绝我吗？”

Chapter 87

Breakfast the next morning was served in an alcove near the rooms of the captured three and it was luxurious indeed. There certainly was a considerable variety to the food and more than enough of everything. Seldon sat at the breakfast table with a mound of spicy sausages before him, totally ignoring Dors Venabilis gloomy predictions concerning stomachs and colic.
Raych said, "The dame ... the Madam Mayor said when she came to see me last night--"
"She came to see you?" said Seldon.
"Yeah. She said she wanted to make sure I was comfortable. She said when she had a chance she would take me to a zoo."
"A zoo?" Seldon looked at Dors. "What kind of zoo can they have on Trantor? Cats and dogs?"
"There are some aboriginal animals," said Dors, "and I imagine they import some aboriginals from other worlds and there are also the shared animals that all the worlds have--other worlds having more than Trantor, of course. As a matter of fact, Wye has a famous zoo, probably the best on the planet after the Imperial Zoo itself."
Raych said, "Shes a nice old lady."
"Not that old," said Dors, "but shes certainly feeding us well."
"Theres that," admitted Seldon.
When breakfast was over, Raych left to go exploring. Once they had retired to Dorss room, Seldon said with marked discontent, "I dont know how long well be left to ourselves. Shes obviously plotted ways of preoccupying our time."
Dors said, "Actually, we have little to complain of at the moment. Were much more comfortable here than we were either in Mycogen or Dahl."
Seldon said, "Dors, youre not being won over by that woman, are you?"
"Me? By Rashelle? Of course not. How can you possibly think so?"
"Well, youre comfortable. Youre well-fed. It would be natural to relax and accept what fortune brings."
"Yes, very natural. And why not do that?"
"Look, you were telling me last night about whats going to happen if she wins out. I may not be much of a historian myself, but I am willing to take your word for it and, actually, it makes sense--even to a nonhistorian. The Empire will shatter and its shards will be fighting each other for ... for ... indefinitely. She must be stopped."
"I agree," said Dors. "She must be. What I fail to see is how we can manage to do that little thing right at this moment." She looked at Seldon narrowly. "Hari, you didnt sleep last night, did you?"
"Did you?" It was apparent he had not.
Dors stared at him, a troubled look clouding her face. "Have you lain awake thinking of Galactic destruction because of what I said?"
"That and some other things. Is it possible to reach Chetter Hummin?"
This last was said in a whisper.
Dors said, "I tried to reach him when we first had to flee arrest in Dahl. He didnt come. Im sure he received the message, but he didnt come. It may be that, for any of a number of reasons, he just couldnt come to us, but when he can he will."
"Do you suppose something has happened to him?"
"No," said Dors patiently. "I dont think so."
"How can you know?"
"The word would somehow get to me. Im sure of it. And the word hasnt gotten to me."
Seldon frowned and said, "Im not as confident as you are about all this. In fact, Im not confident at all. Even if Hummin came, what can he do in this case? He cant fight all of Wye. If they have, as Rashelle claims, the best-organized army on Trantor, what will he be able to do against it?"
"Theres no point in discussing that. Do you suppose you can convince Rashelle--bang it into her head somehow--that you dont have psychohistory?"
"Im sure shes aware that I dont have it and that Im not going to get it for many years--if at all. But shell say I have psychohistory and if she does that skillfully enough, people will believe her and eventually they will act on what she says my predictions and pronouncements are--even if I dont say a word."
"Surely, that will take time. She wont build you up overnight. Or in a week. To do it properly, it might take her a year."
Seldon was pacing the length of the room, turning sharply on his heel and striding back. "That might be so, but I dont know. There would be pressure on her to do things quickly. She doesnt strike me as the kind of woman who has cultivated the habit of patience. And her old father, Mannix IV, would be even more impatient. He must feel the nearness of death and if hes worked for this all his life, he would much prefer to see it done a week before his death rather than a week after. Besides--"
Here he paused and looked around the empty room. "Besides what?"
"Well, we must have our freedom. You see, Ive solved the psychohistory problem."
Dorss eyes widened. "You have it! Youve worked it out."
"Not worked it out in the full sense. That might take decades ... centuries, for all I know. But I now know its practical, not just theoretical. I know it can be done so I must have the time, the peace, the facilities to work at it. The Empire must be held together till I--or possibly my successors--will learn how best to keep it so or how to minimize the disaster if it does split up despite us. It was the thought of having a beginning to my task and of not being able to work at it, that kept me up last night."
第八十七章
第十八部 颠覆
爱玛•塔勒斯：……古川陀卫荷区武装安全部队的一名中士……
……除了这些毫无重要性的体格数据外，对此人的一切一无所知。只知道在某个关键时刻，银河的命运曾掌握在他手中。
——《银河百科全书》


第八十七章
翌日上午．遭到软禁的三个人在一间凹室中进早餐，该处离他们三人的房间都不远。那实在是一顿奢侈的餐点，食物种类繁多，每一样都供过于求。
谢顿面对着餐桌上堆积如山的加味腊肠，完全不理会铎丝•凡纳比里有关反胃与腹痛的忧心警告。
芮奇说：“那娘儿们……区长女士昨晚来看我的时候说……”
“她去看过你？”谢顿问。
“是啊，她说她要确定我住得舒服。她还说有机会的话，会带我去动物园。”
“动物园？”谢顿望向铎丝，“在川陀能有什么样的动物园？猫狗展览？”
“这里有一些本土动物，”铎丝说，“我猜想他们还进口一些其他世界的特有种物。此外，某些动物是各世界共有的——当然，其他世界上的要比川陀的多。事实上，卫荷有个著名的动物园，在这颗行星上的知名度也许仅次于帝国动物园。”
芮奇说：“她是个不错的老大姐。”
“没有那么老，”铎丝说，“但她的确让我们吃得很好。”
“这倒没错。”谢顿承认。
早餐结束之后，芮奇径自跑到别处探险。
一旦他们回到铎丝的房间，谢顿立刻带着明显的不满说：“我不知道我们将被不闻不问多少时日，她显然早有计划，准备消磨我们的时间。”
铎丝说：“其实。此刻我们没什么好抱怨的。比起在麦曲生或达尔，我们在这里要舒适得多。”
谢顿说：“铎丝，你不会被那个女人笼络了吧，有没有？”
“我？被芮喜尔？当然没有。你怎么可能这样想？”
“嗯，你觉得舒服，吃得也好。这自然会使人松懈下来，接受命运的安排。”
“是啊，非常自然。为何不那样做呢？”
“听好，昨晚你告诉过我，她成功的话将会发生什么后果。我自己也许不是历史学家，但我愿意相信你的话。而且，事实上，那很有道理——即使对非历史学家而言。帝国将四分五裂，残存的碎片将互相争斗……永无止境。我们一定要阻止她才行。”
“我同意，”铎丝说，“一定要阻止她。我想不出来的是，在这个节骨眼上，我们如何能做到这件事。”她仔细审视着谢顿，“哈里，你昨晚上夜没睡，是不是？”
“你呢？”显然他是没睡。
铎丝凝视着他，脸上笼罩着阴郁的神情。“因为我说的那些话，害你整夜都在思考银河帝国毁灭的问题？”
“此外还有其他一些事。有没有可能联络到契特•夫铭？”最后几个字是悄声说的。
铎丝说：“我们在达尔开始逃避追捕时，我就试图和他联络，结果他没有来。我确定他收到了那条信息，可是他却没来。也许由于种种原因，他就是无法来找我们，但他有办法时一定会来。”
“你想他会不会发生了什么事？”
“不，”铎丝耐心地说，“我不这么想。”
“你怎能知道？”
“我总会听到一些消息，这点我确定。至今我未曾听到任何消息。”
谢顿皱了皱眉头，义说：“有关这一切，我不像你那么有信心。事实上，我连一点信心都没有。即使夫铭来到此地，这回他又能做什么？他不能和整个卫荷对抗。若是真如芮喜尔所声称，他们拥有川陀上组织最严密的军队，他有什么办法能与之抗衡？”
“讨论这件事根本没意义。你以为你能说服芮喜尔——用什么方法把话灌进她的脑袋——让她相信你并末拥有心理史学？”
“我确定她明白我没有，就算真有心理史学，她也知道我不可能在末来几年内掌握得到。但她会宣称我拥有心理史学，假使她做得足够高明，人们就会相信她，最后不论她说我的预测和断言是什么，他们都会根据她的话行动——即使我一个字也没说。”
“当然，那需要一些时间。她不能让你在一夜之间成名，或是一周之内。想要好好做成这件事，可能要花上她一年的时间。”
谢顿正在房中来回踱步，走到墙角便猛然向后转，再大踏步走回来。“或许就是这样，可是我不知道。应该有些压力促使她尽快行动，在我看来，她不是被培养出了耐心的那种女人。而她的老父亲，曼尼克斯四世，甚至会更没耐心。他一定感到死期将近，如果他一生都在经营这件事，他将非常希望成功之日是在他死前一周，而并非死后一周。此外——”说到这里他顿了一顿，开始环顾这个空洞的房间。
“此外什么？”
“嗯，我们必须拥有自由。你可知道，我已经解决了心理史学的问题。”
铎丝睁大眼睛：“你解决了！你完成了。”
“不，还不算成功。据我判断，那可能要花上数十年……数世纪。但我现在知道它是可行的，而不只是理论的产物。我知道它能成功，所以我必须有充足的时间、太平的局势，以及必要的环境来完成它。帝国必须维持一个整体，直到我——也可能是我的后继者——找出维持现状的最好方法；或者，假使它无论如何也要分裂，如何才能将灾难减至最小程度。就是因为想到我的工作有了起点，却又无法着手进行，才使我昨晚整夜未曾合眼。”
Chapter 88

It was their fifth day in Wye and in the morning Dors was helping Raych into a formal costume that neither was quite familiar with. Raych looked at himself dubiously in the holomirror and saw a reflected image that faced him with precision, imitating all his motions but without any inversion of left and right. Raych had never used a holomirror before and had been unable to keep from trying to feel it, then laughing, almost with embarrassment, when his hand passed through it while the images hand poked ineffectually at his real body.
He said at last, "I look funny."
He studied his tunic, which was made of a very pliant material, with a thin filigreed belt, then passed his hands up a stiff collar that rose like a cup past his ears on either side.
"My head looks like a ball inside a bowl."
Dors said, "But this is the sort of thing rich children wear in Wye. Everyone who sees you will admire you and envy you."
"With my hair all stuck down?"
"Certainly. Youll wear this round little hat."
"Itll make my head more like a ball."
"Then dont let anyone kick it. Now, remember what I told you. Keep your wits about you and dont act like a kid."
"But I am a kid," he said, looking up at her with a wide-eyed innocent expression.
"Im surprised to hear you say that," said Dors. "Im sure you think of yourself as a twelve-year-old adult."
Raych grinned. "Okay. Ill be a good spy."
"Thats not what Im telling you to be. Dont take chances. Dont sneak behind doors to listen. If you get caught at it, youre no good to anyone--especially not to yourself."
"Aw, cmon, Missus, what do ya think I am? A kid or somethin?"
"You just said you were, didnt you, Raych? You just listen to everything thats said without seeming to. And remember what you hear. And tell us. Thats simple enough."
"Simple enough for you to say, Missus Venabili," said Raych with a grin, "and simple enough for me to do."
"And be careful."
Raych winked. "You bet."
A flunky (as coolly impolite as only an arrogant flunky can be) came to take Raych to where Rashelle was awaiting him.
Seldon looked after them and said thoughtfully, "He probably wont see the zoo, hell be listening so carefully. Im not sure its right to thrust a boy into danger like that."
"Danger? I doubt it. Raych was brought up in the slums of Billibotton, remember. I suspect he has more alley smarts than you and I put together. Besides, Rashelle is fond of him and will interpret everything he does in his favor. Poor woman."
"Are you actually sorry for her, Dors?"
"Do you mean that shes not worth sympathy because shes a Mayors daughter and considers herself a Mayor in her own right--and because shes intent on destroying the Empire? Perhaps youre right, but even so there are some aspects of her for which one might show some sympathy. For instance, shes had an unhappy love affair. Thats pretty evident. Undoubtedly, her heart was broken--for a time, at least."
Seldon said, "Have you ever had an unhappy love affair, Dors?"
Dors considered for a moment or two, then said, "Not really. Im too involved with my work to get a broken heart."
"I thought as much."
"Then why did you ask?"
"I might have been wrong."
"How about you?"
Seldon seemed uneasy. "As a matter of fact, yes. I have spared the time for a broken heart. Badly cracked, anyway."
"I thought as much."
"Then why did you ask?"
"Not because I thought I might be wrong, I promise you. I just wanted to see if you would lie. You didnt and Im glad."
There was a pause and then Seldon said, "Five days have passed and nothing has happened."
"Except that we are being treated well, Hari."
"If animals could think, theyd think they were being treated well when they were only being fattened for the slaughter."
"I admit shes fattening the Empire for the slaughter."
"But when?"
"I presume when shes ready."
"She boasted she could complete the coup in a day and the impression I got was that she could do that on any day."
"Even if she could, she would want to make sure that she could cripple the Imperial reaction and that might take time."
"How much time? She plans to cripple the reaction by using me, but she is making no effort to do so. There is no sign that shes trying to build up my importance. Wherever I go in Wye Im unrecognized. There are no Wyan crowds gathering to cheer me. Theres nothing on the news holocasts."
Dors smiled. "One would almost suppose that your feelings are hurt at not being made famous. Youre naive, Hari. Or not a historian, which is the same thing. I think you had better be more pleased that the study of psychohistory will be bound to make a historian of you than that it may save the Empire. If all human beings understood history, they might cease making the same stupid mistakes over and over."
"In what way am I naive?" asked Seldon lifting his head and staring down his nose at her.
"Dont be offended, Hari. I think its one of your attractive features, actually."
"I know. It arouses your maternal instincts and you have been asked to take care of me. But in what way am I naive?"
"In thinking that Rashelle would try to propagandize the population of the Empire, generally, into accepting you as seer. She would accomplish nothing in that way. Quadrillions of people are hard to move quickly. There is social and psychological inertia, as well as physical inertia. And, by coming out into the open, she would simply alert Demerzel."
"Then what is she doing?"
"My guess is that the information about you--suitably exaggerated and glorified--is going out to a crucial few. It is going to those Viceroys of sectors, those admirals of fleets, those people of influence she feels look kindly upon her--or grimly upon the Emperor. A hundred or so of those who might rally to her side will manage to confuse the Loyalists just long enough to allow Rashelle the First to set up her New Order firmly enough to beat off whatever resistance might develop. At least, I imagine that is how she reasons."
"And yet we havent heard from Hummin."
"Im sure he must be doing something just the same. This is too important to ignore."
"Has it occurred to you that he might be dead?"
"Thats a possibility, but I dont think so. If he was, the news would reach me."
"Here?"
"Even here."
Seldon raised his eyebrows, but said nothing.
Raych came back in the late afternoon, happy and excited, with descriptions of monkeys and of Bakarian demoires and he dominated the conversation during dinner.
It was not until after dinner when they were in their own quarters that Dors said, "Now, tell me what happened with Madam Mayor, Raych. Tell me anything she did or said that you think we ought to know."
"One thing," said Raych, his face lighting up. "Thats why she didnt show at dinner, I bet."
"What was it?"
"The zoo was closed except for us, you know. There were lots of us--Rashelle and me and all sorts of guys in uniforms and dames in fancy clothes and like that. Then this guy in a uniform--a different guy, who wasnt there to begin with--came in toward the end and he said something in a low voice and Rashelle turned to all the people and made with her hand like they shouldnt move and they didnt. And she went a little ways away with this new guy, so she could talk to him and no one could hear her. Except I kept paying no attention and kept looking at the different cages and sort of moved near to Rashelle so I could hear her. "She said, How dare they? like she was real mad. And the guy in the uniform, he looked nervous--I just got quick looks because I was trying to make out like I was watching the animals--so mostly I just heard the words. He said somebody--I dont remember the name, but he was a general or somethin. He said this general said the officers had sworn religious to Rashelles old man--"
"Sworn allegiance," said Dors.
"Somethin like that and they was nervous about havin to do what a dame says. He said they wanted the old man or else, if he was kind of sick, he should pick some guy to be Mayor, not a dame."
"Not a dame? Are you sure?"
"Thats what he said. He like whispered it. He was so nervous and Rashelle was so mad she could hardly speak. She said, Ill have his head. They will all swear allegiance to me tomorrow and whoever refuses will lave cause to regret it before an hour has passed. Thats exactly what she said. She broke up the whole party and we all came back and she didnt say one word to me all the time. Just sat there, looking kinda mean and angry."
Dors said, "Good. Dont you mention this to anyone, Raych."
"Course not. Is it what you wanted?"
"Very much what I wanted. You did well, Raych. Now, go to your room and forget the whole thing. Dont even think about it."
Once he was gone, Dors turned to Seldon and said, "This is very interesting. Daughters have succeeded fathers--or mothers, for that matter--and held Mayoralties or other high offices on any number of occasions. There have even been reigning Empresses, as you undoubtedly know, and I cant recall that there was ever in Imperial history any serious question of serving under one. It makes one wonder why such a thing should now, arise in Wye."
Seldon said, "Why not? Weve only recently been in Mycogen, where women are held in a total lack of esteem and couldnt possibly hold positions of power, however minor."
"Yes, of course, but thats an exception. There are other places where women dominate. For the most part, though, government and power have been more or less equisexual. If more men tend to hold high positions, it is usually because women tend to be more bound--biologically--to children."
"But what is the situation in Wye?"
"Equisexual, as far as I know. Rashelle didnt hesitate to assume Mayoral power and I imagine old Mannix didnt hesitate to grant it to her. And she was surprised and furious at encountering male dissent. She cant have expected it."
Seldon said, "Youre clearly pleased at this. Why?"
"Simply because its so unnatural that it must be contrived and I imagine Hummin is doing the contriving."
Seldon said thoughtfully, "You think so?"
"I do," said Dors.
"You know," said Seldon, "so do I."

第八十八章
　　这是他们来到卫荷的第五天早上，铎丝正在帮芮奇穿上一件正式的服装，两人对这种装束都不怎么熟悉。
芮奇以怀疑的眼神望着全息镜中的自己，看到一个准确面对他的反射影像，模仿着他所有的动作，却没有任何左右反转。芮奇以前从未用过全息镜，忍不住试着伸手摸了摸。当他的手穿过那面镜子，而影像的手剌入他真实的身躯时，他马上哈哈大笑，真是有点尴尬。
最后他终于说：“我看来很可笑。”
他打量着身上的短袖袍，那是用非常柔软的质料裁制的，附有一条金丝缠绕的细皮带。然后，他伸手摸摸硬邦邦的衣领，它像个杯子那样竖住他的耳朵两旁。
“我的头看来像是放在碗里的球。”
铎丝说：“但卫荷的富家子弟穿的就是这种东西，每个看到你的人都会赞美你、羡慕你。”
“我的头发得全部趴下吗？”
“这还用说，你要戴着小圆帽。”
“它会让我的头更像个球。”
“那就注意别让任何人踢它。好，记住我告诉你的话，你要随时保持警觉，别表现得像个孩子。”
“但我就是个孩子。”他抬头望着她，睁大眼睛露出一副无辜的表情。
“听到你这样讲真令我惊讶，”铎丝说道，“我确定你自认是个十二岁的成年人。”
芮奇咧嘴笑了笑：“好吧，我会做个好间谍。”
“那不是我叫你做的事。别冒任何险，别躲在门后偷听。假如你被当场抓到，对任何人都没好处——尤其是对你自己。”
“喔，得了吧，姑奶奶，你以为我是什么？一个孩子还是什么东西？”
“你刚刚才说你是个孩子，不是吗？你只要注意听别人说的每件事，但不要显出偷听的样子。记住你所听到的一切，回来之后告诉我们，就是这么简单。”
“你说得倒很简单，凡纳比里姑奶奶，”芮奇又咧嘴一笑，“而我做起来也很简单。”
“还有，要小心点。’’
芮奇眨了眨眼：“遵命。”
一名仆役（只有傲慢自大的仆役才会那么不客气）来接芮奇，带他去找正在等他的芮喜尔。
谢顿望着他们的背影，若有所思地说：“他也许不会看到什么动物，他会非常仔细地偷听。把一个孩子推进那样的危险中，我不确定这样做对不对。”
“危险？我怀疑这一点。芮奇是在脐眼的贫民窟养大的，记得吧。我觉得他的生存能力比你我加起来还要强。此外，芮喜尔喜欢他，会把他做的每件事都往好处解释——可怜的女人。”
“你真的觉得她可怜吗？”
“你的意思是她不值得同情，因为她是区长的女儿，而且自视为理所当然的区长——还有因为她打算毁掉帝国？你也许是对的，但即使如此，她也有某此方面值得我们同情。比如说，她曾有一段以悲剧收场的恋情，那十分明显。毫无疑问，她的心碎了——至少有一段时间。”
谢顿说：“你曾有过一段以悲剧收场的恋情吗，铎丝？”
铎丝考虑了一会儿，然后说：“不能算有，我太专注于自己的工作，没有时间心碎。”
“我早就想到了。”
“那你为什么要问？”
“我有可能猜错。”
“你自己呢？”
谢顿显得很不自在：“事实上，的确有，我曾有段时间有颗破碎的心——至少，它可算是伤痕累累。”
“我早就想到了。”
“那你为什么要问？”
“并非因为我认为自己可能猜错。我只是想看看你会不会说谎。你没有那样做，这使我很高兴。”
顿了一下之后，谢顿又说：“五天过去了，什么事都没发生。”
“只是我们一直受到良好待遇，哈里。”
“如果动物能思想，它们也会认为受到了良好待遇，其实养肥它们只是为屠宰罢了。”
“我承认她正在养肥帝国准备屠宰。”
“可是什么时候呢？”
“我猜是当她准备妥当后。”
“她夸口说能在一天内完成军事政变，而我所得到的印象是，她有办法在任何一天进行。”
“即使她有办法，她还要确定能消除帝国的反击，那可能需要些时间。”
“多少时间？她计划利用我来消除那些反击，可是她并未进行这方面的努力。没有迹象显示她试图宣传我的重要性，我在卫荷不论走到哪里，都没有任何人认识我。没有卫荷的群众聚过来向我欢呼，全息新闻中也什么都没有。”
铎丝微微一笑：“别人几乎会猜想你是因为没能出名而感到难过。你太天真了，哈里，或者说你不是个历史学家，这是同一码子事。研究心理史学必定会使你成为一个历史学家，比较之下拯救帝国的机会倒没有那么大，对于这个事实，我认为你最好更满意点。如果所有人类都了解历史，他们或许就不会一而再、再而三地犯同样的错误。”
“我哪里天真了？”谢顿扬起头来，睨视着看她。
“别生气，哈里。其实，我认为那是你迷人的特点之一。”
“我知道。它激起了你的母性本能，何况你曾经受托照顾我。可是我哪里天真了？”
“你天真地以为芮喜尔会试图对帝国的民众做全面性宣传，让大家接受你是个先知。那样做她将一无所获，万兆民众难以很快打动。除了有形的惯性之外，还有社会和心理上的惯性。而且，假如那样公然行事，她等于是在警告丹莫茨尔。”
“那她正在做什么呢？”
“我的猜想是，有关你的消息——经过适当的夸大和美化——正在传给关键的少数人，传给她觉得对她友善，或是厌恶帝国的星区总督、舰队司令，以及具有影响力的人士。一百多个这样的人若是站在她那边，就能使忠贞之士困惑好一阵子，足以允许芮喜尔一世稳稳建立起她的新秩序，击败任何可能潜在的反抗力量。至少，我猜那是她心中的想法。”
“但我们还没有夫铭的消息。”
“我确信他一定还是在做些什么，他不会忽略这么重要的事。”
“你有没有想到过他可能死了？”
“那是一种可能，但我不那么想，否则我会得到消息。”
“在这里？”
“即使在这里。”
谢顿扬起眉毛，但没有再说话。
芮奇在接近傍晚时回来，他既高兴又兴奋，不停地描述着猴子与巴卡鹤的种种趣事。而在晚餐时，从头到尾他都兴冲冲地抢着说话。
直到晚餐结束，他们回到自己的寝室，铎丝才说：“现存，告诉我区长女士所做的或所说的任何事情，把你认为我们该知道的都告诉我。”
“有一件事，”芮奇的面孔亮了起来，“她没出席晚餐，那一定是有原因的，我敢打赌。”
“是什么事？”
“你知道的，动物园今天关闭，只对我们开放。我们有许多人——芮喜尔和我还有穿制服的各种哥儿们和穿着拉风衣裳的娘儿们等等。然后一个穿制服的哥儿们——另一个哥儿们，他原来不在那里——在快结束的时候走进来。他低声说了些什么，芮喜尔就转向大家，做了一个好像他们不该动的手势，他们全都乖乖不动。然后她和这个新来的哥儿们走开些，这样她就能和他说话，而别人听不到她说些什么。不过我继续装得心不在焉，继续看着各个笼子，就这样凑近了芮喜尔，所以我能听到她讲的话。
“她说：‘他们怎么敢？’她像是真火了。那个穿制服的哥儿们，他看来很紧张——我只是很快瞥了一眼，因为我试着装作在观看动物，所以人多数时间我只是听到那些对话。他说某个人，我不记得名字，但他是个将军什么的。他说这个将军说，军官们曾经对芮喜尔的老头宣誓效忠…一”
“宣誓效忠。”铎丝说。
“反正是像那样的东西，而他们对于服从一个娘儿们的话感到不对劲。他说他们要那个老头，或者，如果他生了病什么的，他应该挑个哥儿们做区长，而不是一个娘儿们。”
“不是一个娘儿们？你确定吗？”
“他就是那么说的，他说的差不多是悄悄话。他是那么紧张，芮喜尔又是那么恼火，她几乎说不出话来。她说：‘我要他的脑袋，明天他们通通要对我宣誓效忠，不论谁拒绝，一小时之内，他就会有后悔的理由。’那是她说的每一个字。她解散了整个活动，我们就全部回来了。她一直没对我说半句话，只是坐在那里，看来又凶又生气。”
铎丝说：“很好，别对任何人提起这些．芮奇。”
“当然不会。这就是你要的吗？”
“正是我要的，你做得很好，芮奇。现在，回到你的房间，把整件事忘掉，甚至不要想到它。”
等他离开之后，铎丝立刻转向谢顿说：“这非常有意思。过去有许许多多的例子，是女儿继父亲或母亲之后，接掌区长职位或其他高位。过去甚至有在位的女皇，这点你儿疑也知道。而我想不起来在帝国历史上，有哪个女皇的领导曾经引起严重问题。这不禁令人纳闷，为何这种事如今会在卫荷发生。”
谢顿说：“为何不呢？我们最近才在麦曲生待过，那里的女人完全不受尊重，而且不可能拥有任何权力的位置，不论多么低微。”
“没错，当然，但那是个例外。也有其他一此地方，是由女性主宰一切。不过，大多数的情况，两性在政府和权力上的地位多少是平等的。假如说掌握高位的男性较多，通常是因为女性受子女的牵累较多——就生物学观点而言。”
“但卫荷的情况如何？”
“两性平等，据我所知是这样。芮喜尔并未犹豫获取区长的权力，我猜想老曼尼克斯也未曾犹豫交给她。在男性异议分子出现之际，她感到惊讶和狂怒，是因为根本出乎她意料之外。”
谢顿说：“你显然对这点感到高兴。为什么？”
“因为它既然如此不寻常，就一定是人为策动的结果，而我猜想策动者便是夫铭。”
谢顿意味深长地说：“你这么想吗？”
“我是这么想。”铎丝说。
“你可知道，”谢顿说，“我也这么想。”
Chapter 89

It was their tenth day in Wye and in the morning Hari Seldons door signal sounded and Raychs high-pitched voice outside was crying out, "Mister! Mister Seldon! Its war!"
Seldon took a moment to swap from sleep to wakefulness and scrambled out of bed. He was shivering slightly (the Wyans liked their domiciles on the chilly side, he had discovered quite early in his stay there) when he threw the door open.
Raych bounced in, excited and wide-eyed. "Mister Seldon, they have Mannix, the old Mayor. They have--"
"Who have, Raych?"
"The Imperials, Their jets came in last night all over. The news holocasts are telling all about it. Its on in Missuss room. She said to let ya sleep, but I figured ya would wanner know."
"And you were quite right." Seldon pausing only tong enough to throw on a bathrobe, burst into Dorss room. She was fully dressed and was watching the holo-set in the alcove.
Behind the clear, small image of a desk sat a man, with the Spaceship-and-Sun sharply defined on the left-front of his tunic. On either side, two soldiers, also wearing the Spaceship-and-Sun, stood armed. The officer at the desk was saying, "--is under the peaceful control of his Imperial Majesty. Mayor Mannix is safe and well and is in full possession of his Mayoral powers under the guidance of friendly Imperial troops. He will be before you soon to urge calm on all Wyans and to ask any Wyan soldiers still in arms to lay them down."
There were other news holocasts by various newsmen with unemotional voices, all wearing Imperial armbands. The news was all the same: surrender by this or that unit of the Wyan security forces after firing a few shots for the record--and sometimes after no resistance at all. This town center and that town center were occupied--and there were repeated views of Wyan crowds somberly watching Imperial forces marching down the streets.
Dors said, "It was perfectly executed, Hari. Surprise was complete. There was no chance of resistance and none of consequence was offered."
Then Mayor Mannix IV appeared, as had been promised. He was standing upright and, perhaps for the sake of appearances, there were no Imperials in sight, though Seldon was reasonably certain that an adequate number were present just out of camera range.
Mannix was old, but his strength, though worn, was still apparent. His eyes did not meet the holo-camera and his words were spoken as though forced upon him--but, as had been promised, they counseled Wyans to remain calm, to offer no resistance, to keep Wye from harm, and to cooperate with the Emperor who, it was hoped, would survive long on the throne.
"No mention of Rashelle," said Seldon. "Its as though his daughter doesnt exist."
"No one has mentioned her," said Dors, "and this place, which is, after all, her residence--or one of them--hasnt been attacked. Even if she manages to slip away and take refuge in some neighboring sector, I doubt she will be safe anywhere on Trantor for long."
"Perhaps not," came a voice; "but Ill be safe here for a little while." Rashelle entered. She was properly dressed, properly calm. She was even smiling, but it was no smile of joy; it was, rather, a cold baring of teeth.
The three stared at her in surprise for a moment and Seldon wondered if she had any of her servants with her or if they had promptly deserted her at the first sign of adversity.
Dors said a little coldly, "I see, Madam Mayor, that your hopes for a coup can not be maintained. Apparently, you have been forestalled."
"I have not been forestalled. I have been betrayed. My officers have been tampered with and--against all history and rationality--they have refused to fight for a woman but only for their old master. And, traitors that they are, they then let their old master be seized so that he cannot lead them in resistance."
She looked about for a chair and sat down. "And now the Empire must continue to decay and die when I was prepared to offer it new life."
"I think," said Dors, "the Empire has avoided an indefinite period of useless fighting and destruction. Console yourself with that, Madam Mayor."
It was as though Rashelle did not hear her. "So many years of preparation destroyed in a night."
She sat there beaten, defeated, and seemed to have aged twenty years.
Dors said, "It could scarcely have been done in a night. The suborning of your officers--if that took place--must have taken time."
"At that, Demerzel is a master and quite obviously I underestimated him. How he did it, I dont know--threats, bribes, smooth and specious argument. He is a master at the art of stealth and betrayal--I should have known." She went on after a pause. "If this was outright force on his part, I would have had no trouble destroying anything he sent against us. Who would think that Wye would be betrayed, that an oath of allegiance would be so lightly thrown aside?"
Seldon said with automatic rationality, "But I imagine the oath was made not to you, but to your father."
"Nonsense," said Rashelle vigorously. "When my father gave me the Mayoral office, as he was legally entitled to do, he automatically passed on to me any oaths of allegiance made to him. There is ample precedence for this. It is customary to have the oath repeated to the new ruler, but that is a ceremony only and not a legal requirement. My officers know that, though they choose to forget. They use my womanhood as an excuse because they quake in fear of Imperial vengeance that would never have come had they been staunch or tremble with greed for promised rewards they will surely never get--if I know Demerzel." She turned sharply toward Seldon. "He wants you, you know. Demerzel struck at us for you."
Seldon started. "Why me?"
"Dont be a fool. For the same reason I wanted you ... to use you as a tool, of course." She sighed. "At least I am not utterly betrayed. There are still loyal soldiers to be found.--Sergeant!"
Sergeant Emmer Thalus entered with a soft cautious step that seemed incongruous, considering his size. His uniform was spruce, his long blond mustache fiercely curled.
"Madam Mayor," he said, drawing himself to attention with a snap. He was still, in appearance, the side of beef that Hari had named him--a man still following orders blindly, totally oblivious to the new and changed state of affairs.
Rashelle smiled sadly at Raych. "And how are you, little Raych? I had meant to make something of you. It seems now I wont be able to."
"Hello, Missus ... Madam," said Raych awkwardly.
"And to have made something of you too, Dr. Seldon," said Rashelle, "and there also I must crave pardon. I cannot."
"For me, Madam, you need have no regrets."
"But I do. I cannot very well let Demerzel have you. That would be one victory too many for him and at least I can stop that."
"I would not work for him, Madam, I assure you, any more than I would have worked for you."
"It is not a matter of work. It is a matter of being used. Farewell, Dr. Seldon. Sergeant, blast him."
The sergeant drew his blaster at once and Dors, with a loud cry, lunged forward--but Seldon reached out for her and caught her by the elbow. He hung on desperately.
"Stay back, Dors," he shouted, "or hell kill you. He wont kill me. You too, Raych. Stand back. Dont move."
Seldon faced the sergeant. "You hesitate, Sergeant, because you know you cannot shoot. I might have killed you ten days ago, but I did not. And you gave me your word of honor at that time that you would protect me."
"What are you waiting for?" snapped Rashelle. "I said shoot him down, Sergeant."
Seldon said nothing more. He stood there while the sergeant, eyes bulging, held his blaster steady and pointed at Seldons head.
"You have your order!" shrieked Rashelle.
"I have your word," said Seldon quietly.
And Sergeant Thalus said in a choked tone, "Dishonored either way." His hand fell and his blaster clanged to the floor.
Rashelle cried out, "Then you too betray me."
Before Seldon could move or Dors free herself from his grip, Rashelle seized the blaster, turned it on the sergeant, and closed contact. Seldon had never seen anyone blasted before. Somehow, from the name of the weapon perhaps, he had expected a loud noise, an explosion of flesh and blood. This Wyan blaster, at least, did nothing of the sort. What mangling it did to the organs inside the sergeants chest Seldon could not tell but, without a change in expression, without a wince of pain, the sergeant crumbled and fell, dead beyond any doubt or any hope.
And Rashelle turned the blaster on Seldon with a firmness that put to rest any hope for his own life beyond the next second.
It was Raych, however, who jumped into action the moment the sergeant fell. Racing between Seldon and Rashelle, he waved his hands wildly.
"Missus, Missus," he called. "Dont shoot."
For a moment, Rashelle looked confused. "Out of the way, Raych. I dont want to hurt you."
That moment of hesitation was all Dors needed. Breaking loose violently, she plunged toward Rashelle with a long low dive. Rashelle went down with a cry and the blaster hit the ground a second time.
Raych retrieved it.
Seldon, with a deep and shuddering breath, said, "Raych, give that to me." But Raych backed away.
"Ya aint gonna kill her, are ya, Mister Seldon? She was nice to me."
"I wont kill anyone, Raych," said Seldon. "She killed the sergeant and would have killed me, but she didnt shoot rather than hurt you and well let her live for that."
It was Seldon, who now sat down, the blaster held loosely in his hand, while Dors removed the neuronic whip from the dead sergeants other holster.
A new voice rang out. "Ill take care of her now, Seldon."
Seldon looked up and in sudden joy said, "Hummin! Finally!"
"Im sorry it took so long, Seldon. I had a lot to do. How are you, Dr. Venabili? I take it this is Mannixs daughter, Rashelle. But who is the boy?"
"Raych is a young Dahlite friend of ours," said Seldon.
Soldiers were entering and, at a small gesture from Hummin, they lifted Rashelle respectfully.
Dors, able to suspend her intent surveillance of the other woman, brushed at her clothes with her hands and smoothed her blouse. Seldon suddenly realized that he was still in his bathrobe.
Rashelle, shaking herself loose from the soldiers with contempt, pointed to Hummin and said to Seldon, "Who is this?"
Seldon said, "It is Chetter Hummin, a friend of mine and my protector on this planet."
"Your protector." Rashelle laughed madly. "You fool! You idiot! That man is Demerzel and if you look at your Venabili woman, you will see from her face that she is perfectly aware of that. You have been trapped all along, far worse than ever you were with me!"

第八十九章
　　这是他们来到卫荷的第十天早上，哈里•谢顿的房门信号突然响起，外面随即传来芮奇高亢的声音：“先生！谢顿先生！战争爆发了！”
谢顿从睡梦中惊醒，然后匆匆起床。当他推开房门的时候，身子不禁微微发抖（卫荷人喜欢让他们的住所保持低温，住在此地不久之后他便发现这点）。
芮奇跳进来，兴奋得睁大眼睛：“谢顿先生，他们抓到了曼尼克斯，那个老区长！他们还……”
“他们是谁，芮奇？”
“帝国军队，他们的喷射机昨晚飞进来，到处都是。全息新闻现在播报的都是这些，在姑奶奶的房间。她说要让你睡觉，但我猜你会想知道。”
“你猜得相当正确。”谢顿只耽搁了披上一件浴袍的时间，就立刻闯进铎丝房中。她早已穿戴整齐，正在凹室内观看全息电视。
在画面中，一张整洁的小办公桌后面坐着一名男子，他的短袖军服左胸处有个耀眼的“星舰与太阳”标志。在他两旁站着两名武装士兵，两人身上也都挂着“星舰与太阳”。坐在办公桌旁的军官正在说：“……在皇帝陛下的和平控制下，在友善的帝国部队保护下，曼尼克斯区长安然无事，完全掌握着区长的权力。他很快就会出现在你们面前，来劝导所有的卫荷人保持冷静，并要求所有顽抗的卫荷战士放下武器。”
此外还有一些记者播报的全息新闻，他们全都佩戴着帝国臂章，声音毫无感情，新闻内容都千篇一律：在象征性开火后——有时甚至根本未做抵抗——卫荷安全武力的这个、那个部队便全部投降；这个、那个市镇中心已被占领——卫荷群众面色凝重地看着帝国军队列队通过大街小巷，这样的画面不断重复着。
铎丝说：“这是一次完美的行动，哈里，完全出其不意。根本没有抵抗的机会，根本没有重大的抵抗行动。”
然后，正如刚才的预报，区长曼尼克斯四世出现了。他笔直地站着，或许为了面子上好看，画面中看不见帝国军士。不过谢顿相当确定，他们一定站在摄影机镜头外。
曼尼克斯相当年迈，虽然神情疲惫，但体力显然还不错。他的目光并未对准全息摄影机，他说的话似乎都是被强迫的——不过，正如刚才的预报，内容是劝告卫荷人保持冷静，不要做任何抵抗，要避免使卫荷受到伤害，要与皇上充分合作，并且祝福皇上万寿无疆。
“没有提到芮喜尔，”谢顿说，“仿佛他的女儿不存在。”
“没有任何人提到她。”铎丝说，“这个地方毕竟是她的官邸，或者是其中之一，却未曾遭到攻击。即使她设法溜走，前往邻区寻求庇护，我也不信她能在川陀任何角落获得长久的安全。”
“也许不能，”突然传来另一个声音，“但我在这里至少暂时安全。”
芮喜尔走进来。她的穿着如常，镇静如常。她甚至带着微笑，但却显得皮笑肉不笑，更像是一种龇牙咧嘴的冷酷表情。
其他三人惊讶地望了她片刻。谢顿纳闷是否还有任何随从跟着她，或是在事变的迹象出现后，他们立刻弃她而去。
铎丝冷淡地说道：“我看，区长女士，你想发动军事政变的希望破灭了？显然，你已经被别人捷足先登了。”
“我没有被捷足先登，我是遭到了背叛。我的军官受到挑拨，他们拒绝为一名女子而战，只肯效忠他们的老主子——这违背了一切的历史和理性。而且，他们这些不折不扣的叛徒，又坐视老主子被敌人捉去，使他无法再领导抵抗到底。”
她环顾四周，找到一张椅子坐下。“现在，帝国一定会继续衰败、死亡——就在我准备给它一个新生的时候。”
“我想，”铎丝说，“帝国避免了一场无限期的无端争战和破坏。用这点来安慰你自己吧，区长女士。”
芮喜尔仿佛没听到她的话：“这么多年的准备，竟然毁于一夕之间。”她坐在那里，仿佛被失败啃噬，一下老了二十岁。
铎丝说：“一夕之间不可能发生这种事。怂恿你的军官——假如真有此事——一定需要一段时间。”
“丹莫茨尔是此道高手，我显然低估了他。我不知道他究竟是怎么做到的——威胁、利诱，还是用似是而非的言论蛊惑煽动。他是玩弄阴谋和鼓动叛变的个中高手，我早就该知道的。”
顿了一下之后，她继续说：“如果这只是单纯的武力入侵，我将毫不费力地摧毁他派来的任何部队。谁会想到卫荷竟会遭到背叛，效忠的誓言那么轻易就被抛到一旁？”
谢顿不假思索，以理性的态度说：“但我猜想那些誓言的对象不是你，而是你的父亲。”
“荒謦！”芮喜尔中气十足地说，“当家父将区长职位交给我的时候——依法他有权这样做，任何对他效忠的誓言也自动被移交给我，这在过去有许多先例。照惯例，应该对新任统治者再宣誓一次，但那只是一种仪式，而不是必需的法律程序。我的军官都知道这点，可是他们故意忘记。他们以我是女流之辈作借口，因为他们想到帝国的报复就吓得发抖——假使他们忠贞不贰，根本不会有这种事；或者，因为他们想到对方应允的赏赐就贪婪得打颤——其实他们绝对得不到，如果我没看错丹莫茨尔的话。”
她猛然转向谢顿：“他要你，你可知道，丹莫茨尔攻打我们是为了你。”
谢顿吃了一惊：“我？为什么？”
“别傻了。他要你跟我要你的原因一样——当然是要拿你当工具。”她叹了一声，“至少我没有彻底遭到背叛，还能找到仍旧忠诚的战士——中士！”
爱玛•塔勒斯中士蹑手蹑脚地走进来，这种步伐与他的身躯似乎不太协调。他的制服一尘不染，金色的长八字胡弯曲得很厉害。
“区长女士。”他一面说，一面“啪”地一声立定站好。
他看起来仍是谢顿所谓的大块头——一个仍旧盲目服从命令，完全无视情势已有崭新变化的人。
芮喜尔对芮奇露出苦笑：“你好吗，小芮奇？我曾有意好好栽培你，现在似乎办不到了。”
“嗨，姑奶奶……女士。”芮奇笨拙地说。
“我也曾想好好栽培你，谢顿博士。”芮喜尔说，“而我也必须请你原谅，我已无能为力。”
“对我，女士，你不需要感到抱歉。”
“不，我必须跟你说抱歉。我不能就这样让丹莫茨尔得到你，那将使他获得一次太大的胜利．至少我能阻止这件事。”
“我不会为他工作，女士，我向你保证，就像我不会为你工作一样。”
“这不是为谁工作的问题，而是被谁利用的问题。永别了，谢顿博士——中士，轰掉他！”
中士立刻掏出手铳，铎丝随即大喊一声，同时猛力向前冲——谢顿却伸手抓住她的手肘，并且死命抓着不放。
“待在后面，铎丝，”他叫道，“否则他会杀你。他不会杀我的——你也一样，芮奇，站在后面，不要乱动。”
谢顿面向中士说：“你在犹豫。中士，因为你知道你不能发射。十天前我有机会杀你，但我没那样做。你当时曾以名誉对我担保，保证你会保护我。”
“你还在等什么？”芮喜尔怒吼道，“我说把他射倒，中士。”
谢顿不再说什么，他只是站在邡里。那位中士稳稳地握着于铣，瞄准着谢顿的头颅，他的双眼几乎要爆出来。
“我已经下达命令！”芮喜尔尖叫道。
“我拥有你的承诺。”谢顿以平静的口吻说。
塔勒斯中士则以哽咽的声音说：“怎么做都是名誉扫地。”他的手垂下来，手铳掉到地板上，发出了铿锵的声响。
芮喜尔高声喊道：“那么你也背叛了我！”
在谢顿能有所行动之前，在铎丝尚未挣脱他的双手之际，芮喜尔抓起那把手铳，将它对准中士，然后扣下扳机。
鲥顿以前从未见过什么人遭手铳轰击。然而，或许是这个武器的发音引起的联想，他一直以为会有一声巨响，以及血肉横飞的爆炸。：事实上，至少这把卫荷手铳并未造成那种效果。它对中士胸腔内的器官造成了什么样的搅扰，这点谢顿并不知道，但是中士在表情不变、未露出一丝痛苦神色的情况下，就倒在地上瘫成一团，成为一具毫无疑问也毫无希望的死尸。
芮喜尔转过手铣对准谢顿，从她坚决的表情看来，谢顿知道自己已经没有希望活过下一秒钟。
然而，就在中士倒地的那一刻，芮奇同时展开了行动。他跑到谢顿与芮喜尔之间，举起双手疯狂地挥动。
“姑奶奶，姑奶奶，”他叫道，“别发射。”
一时之间，芮喜尔看来相当为难。“闪开，芮奇，我不想伤害你。”
这片刻的迟疑正是铎丝所需要的。她猛力挣脱谢顿，贴地俯冲撞向芮喜尔。芮喜尔大叫一声，随即仆倒在地，那把手铳再度落到地板上。
芮奇赶紧将它夺过来。
谢顿颤抖地吁了口长气，然后说：“芮奇，把它给我。”
芮奇却向后退去：“你不是要杀掉她吧，啊，谢顿先生？她对我不错。”
“我不会杀害任何人，芮奇。”谢顿说，“她杀了那名中士，而且正准备杀我，但她由于不愿伤你而未发射。看在这个分上，我们会让她活下去。”
现在轮到谢顿坐在椅子上，手中轻轻握着那把手铳。铎丝则从中士尸体上另一个皮套中取走神经鞭。
一个新的声音突然响起：“把她交给我处理吧，谢顿。”
谢顿抬起头来，以惊喜的声音说：“夫铭！你终于来了！”
“我很抱歉花了那么久时间，谢顿，但我有很多事要做。你好吗，凡纳比里博士？我猜这就是曼尼克斯的女儿，芮喜尔。可是这个男孩是谁？”
“芮奇来自达尔，是我们的小朋友。”埘顿说。
一队上兵鱼贯而入，夫铭做了一个小手势之后，他们便以尊敬的态度扶起芮喜尔。
铎丝终于不必目不转睛地监视着那个女人，她用双手理了理自己的衣服，并把上衣稍微拉平。谢顿突然意识到自己仍穿着浴袍。
芮喜尔轻蔑地挣脱了身旁的士兵，指着夫铭对谢顿说：“这是谁？”
谢顿说：“他是契特•夫铭，我的一个朋友，也是我在本行星上的保护者。”
“你的保护者？”芮喜尔纵声狂笑，“你这个傻瓜！你这个白痴！这个人就是丹莫茨尔。如果你看看你的女人凡纳比里，你会从她的脸上看出来，她对这点心知肚明。你从头到尾都陷在一个圈套里，比在我的圈套中还要糟得多！”
Chapter 90

Hummin and Seldon sat at lunch that day, quite alone, a pall of quiet between them for the most part. It was toward the end of the meal that Seldon stirred and said in a lively voice, "Well, sir, how do I address you? I think of you as Chester Hummin still, but even if I accept you in your other persona, I surely cannot address you as Eto Demerzel. In that capacity, you have a title and I dont know the proper usage. Instruct me."
The other said gravely, "Call me Hummin--if you dont mind. Or Chetter. Yes, I am Eto Demerzel, but with respect to you I am Hummin. As a matter of fact, the two are not distinct. I told you that the Empire is decaying and failing. I believe that to be true in both my capacities. I told you that I wanted psychohistory as a way of preventing that decay and failure or of bringing about a renewal and reinvigoration if the decay and failure must run its course. I believe that in both my capacities too."
"But you had me in your grip--I presume you were in the vicinity when I had my meeting with His Imperial Majesty."
"With Cleon. Yes, of course."
"And you might have spoken to me, then, exactly as you later did as Hummin."
"And accomplished what? As Demerzel, I have enormous tasks. I have to handle Cleon, a well-meaning but not very capable ruler, and prevent him, insofar as I can, from making mistakes. I have to do my bit in governing Trantor and the Empire too. And, as you see, I had to spend a great deal of time in preventing Wye from doing harm."
"Yes, I know," murmured Seldon.
"It wasnt easy and I nearly lost out. I have spent years sparring carefully with Mannix, learning to understand his thinking and planning a countermove to his every move. I did not think, at any time, that while he was still alive he would pass on his powers to his daughter. I had not studied her and I was not prepared for her utter lack of caution. Unlike her father, she has been brought up to take power for granted and had no clear idea of its limitations. So she got you and forced me to act before I was quite ready."
"You almost lost me as a result. I faced the muzzle of a blaster twice."
"I know," said Hummin, nodding. "And we might have lost you Upperside too--another accident I could not foresee."
"But you havent really answered my question. Why did you send me chasing all over the face of Trantor to escape from Demerzel when you yourself were Demerzel?"
"You told Cleon that psychohistory was a purely theoretical concept, a kind of mathematical game that made no practical sense. That might indeed have been so, but if I approached you officially, I was sure you would merely have maintained your belief. Yet I was attracted to the notion of psychohistory. I wondered whether it might not be, after all, just a game. You must understand that I didnt want merely to use you, I wanted a real and practical psychohistory.
"So I sent you, as you put it, chasing all over the face of Trantor with the dreaded Demerzel close on your heels at all times. That, I felt, would concentrate your mind powerfully. It would make psychohistory something exciting and much more than a mathematical game. You would try to work it out for the sincere idealist Hummin, where you would not for the Imperial flunky Demerzel. Also, you would get a glimpse of various sides of Trantor and that too would be helpful--certainly more helpful than living in an ivory tower on a far-off planet, surrounded entirely by fellow mathematicians. Was I right? Have you made progress?"
Seldon said, "In psychohistory? Yes, I did, Hummin. I thought you knew."
"How should I know?"
"I told Dors."
"But you hadnt told me. Nevertheless, you tell me so now. That is good news."
"Not entirely," said Seldon. "I have made only the barest beginning. But it is a beginning."
"Is it the kind of beginning that can be explained to a nonmathematician?"
"I think so. You see, Hummin, from the start I have seen psychohistory as a science that depends on the interaction of twenty-five million worlds, each with an average population of four thousand million. Its too much. Theres no way of handling something that complex. If I was to succeed at all, if there was to be any way of finding a useful psychohistory, I would first have to find a simpler system.
"So I thought I would go back in time and deal with a single world, a world that was the only one occupied by humanity in the dim age before the colonization of the Galaxy. In Mycogen they spoke of an original world of Aurora and in Dahl I heard word of an original world of Earth. I thought they might be the same world under different names, but they were sufficiently different in one key point, at least, to make that impossible. And it didnt matter. So little was known of either one, and that little so obscured by myth and legend, that there was no hope of making use of psychohistory in connection with them."
He paused to sip at his cold juice, keeping his eyes firmly on Hummins face.
Hummin said, "Well? What then?"
"Meanwhile, Dors had told me something I call the hand-on-thigh story. It was of no innate significance, merely a humorous and entirely trivial tale. As a result, though, Dors mentioned the different sex mores on various worlds and in various sectors of Trantor. It occurred to me that she treated the different Trantorian sectors as though they were separate worlds. I thought, idly, that instead of twenty-five million different worlds, I had twenty-five million plus eight hundred to deal with. It seemed a trivial difference, so I forgot it and thought no more about it.
"But as I traveled from the Imperial Sector to Streeling to Mycogen to Dahl to Wye, I observed for myself how different each was. The thought of Trantor--not as a world but as a complex of worlds--grew stronger, but still I didnt see the crucial point.
"It was only when I listened to Rashelle--you see, it was good that I was finally captured by Wye and it was good that Rashelles rashness drove her into the grandiose schemes that she imparted to me--When I listened to Rashelle, as I said, she told me that all she wanted was Trantor and some immediately adjacent worlds. It was an Empire in itself, she said, and dismissed the outer worlds as distant nothings.
"It was then that, in a moment, I saw what I must have been harboring in my hidden thoughts for a considerable time. On the one hand, Trantor possessed an extraordinarily complex social system, being a populous world made up of eight hundred smaller worlds. It was in itself a system complex enough to make psychohistory meaningful and yet it was simple enough, compared to the Empire as a whole, to make psychohistory perhaps practical.
"And the Outer Worlds, the twenty-five million of them? They were distant nothings. Of course, they affected Trantor and were affected by Trantor, but these were second-order effects. If I could make psychohistory work as a first approximation for Trantor alone, then the minor effects of the Outer Worlds could be added as later modifications. Do you see what I mean? I was searching for a single world on which to establish a practical science of psychohistory and I was searching for it in the far past, when all the time the single world I wanted was under my feet now."
Hummin said with obvious relief and pleasure, "Wonderful!"
"But its all left to do, Hummin. I must study Trantor in sufficient detail. I must devise the necessary mathematics to deal with it. If I am lucky and live out a full lifetime, I may have the answers before I die. If not, my successors will have to follow me. Conceivably, the Empire may have fallen and splintered before psychohistory becomes a useful technique."
"I will do everything I can to help you."
"I know it," said Seldon.
"You trust me, then, despite the fact I am Demerzel?"
"Entirely. Absolutely. But I do so because you are not Demerzel."
"But I am," insisted Hummin.
"But you are not. Your persona as Demerzel is as far removed from the truth as is your persona as Hummin."
"What do you mean?" Hummins eyes grew wide and he backed away slightly from Seldon.
"I mean that you probably chose the name Hummin out of a wry sense of what was fitting. Hummin is a mispronunciation of human, isnt it?" Hummin made no response. He continued to stare at Seldon.
And finally Seldon said, "Because youre not human, are you, Hummin/Demerzel? Youre a robot."
Dors
SELDON, HARI-- ... it is customary to think of Hari Seldon only in connection with psychohistory, to see him only as mathematics and social change personified. There is no doubt that he himself encouraged this for at no time in his formal writings did he give any hint as to how he came to solve the various problems of psychohistory. His leaps of thought might have all been plucked from air, for all he tells us. Nor does he tell us of the blind alleys into which he crept or the wrong turnings he may have made. ... 
As for his private life, it is a blank. Concerning his parents and siblings, we know a handful of factors, no more. His only son, Raych Seldon, is known to have been adopted, but how that came about is not known. Concerning his wife, we only know that she existed. Clearly, Seldon wanted to be a cipher except where psychohistory was concerned. It is as though he felt--or wanted it to be felt--that he did not live, he merely psychohistorified.
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
第九十章
　　当天中午，夫铭与谢顿共进午餐，除此之外没有别人，大多数时间两人都沉默不语。
直到这一餐快结束时，谢顿才挪动了一下，以轻快的声音说：“好啦，阁下，我该如何称呼你？我仍然将你想成‘契特•夫铭’，但即使我接受你的另一个身份，我当然不能称呼你‘伊图•丹莫茨尔’。在那个身份之下，你拥有一个头衔，而我不知道正确的用法，教导我吧。”
对方以严肃的口吻说：“如果你不介意，就叫我‘夫铭’吧，或者‘契特’也行。是的，我就是伊图•丹莫茨尔，但是对你而言，我仍旧是夫铭。事实上，这两者没有分别。我曾经告诉你，帝国正在衰败和没落，我的两个身份都相信这是真的。我也告诉过你，我想要用心理史学预防这种衰败和没落；假若衰败和没落是一种无可避免的过程，就用它作为更新和复兴的工具。这点我的两个身份也都相信。”
“可是我一直在你的掌握中。我猜当我和皇帝陛下会谈时，你就在他附近。”
“你和克里昂会谈时？没错，当然。”
“那么，你当时应该就能跟我谈，就像你后来以夫铭的身份所做的那样。”
“那能有什么帮助呢？身为丹莫茨尔，我有数不清的工作。我必须应付克里昂，一个有善心却不是很能干的统治者，尽我所能地预防他犯错；我还得为治理川陀以及整个帝国尽一己之力。此外，你也看得出来，我当初得花上大量时间，预防卫荷造成任何伤害。”
“是的，我知道。”谢顿喃喃地说。
“这可不容易，我几乎失败了。我花了许多年的时间，谨慎地和曼尼克斯周旋，学习了解他的想法，对他的每一步行动策划出反制之道。我从来没有想到，他会在有生之年将权力传给他的女儿。我没研究过她，并未准备应付她全然鲁莽的行动。她和她的父亲不同，从小就将权力视为理所当然，对它的限度没有明确概念。所以她才会把你抓来，迫使我在准备妥当前采取行动。”
“结果使你几乎失去了我，我曾两度面对一把手铳的铳口。”
“我知道，”夫铭一面说一面点头，“我们在穹顶上也差点失去你，那是另一个我没有预见的意外。”
“可是你还没有真正回答我的问题。你自己就是丹莫茨尔，为何还要让我为了逃避丹莫茨尔而跑遍川陀表面？”
“你告诉克里昂说心理史学是纯粹的理论概念，是一种数学游戏，没有实质上的意义。这点或许的确是事实，但我如果以正式的身份询问你，我确定你只会坚持自己的信念。然而心理史学的想法吸引了我，我想知道它会不会不仅只是一种游戏。你一定了解我并非只要利用你，我想要的是真正的、可行的心理史学。
“所以正如你所说，我让你跑遍了川陀表面，而可怕的丹莫茨尔随时随地紧跟在后。我觉得这样一来，会让你的心智极度集中。它会使心理史学成为一种刺激的事物，而非只是个数学游戏。为了真诚的理想主义者夫铭，你会尝试将它发展出来，但你不会为皇帝的奴才丹莫茨尔这样做。此外，这样会让你窥见川陀不同的角落，而这同样有帮助——绝对比住在一颗遥远行星上的象牙塔中，身边全是同行的数学家更有帮助。我说得对吗？你有些进展了吗？”
谢顿说：“心理史学？是的，有了，夫铭。我以为你知道了。”
“我怎么会知道？”
“我告诉铎丝了。”
“但你没有告诉我。无论如何，你现在告诉了我。这是个好消息。”
“并不尽然，”谢顿说，“我仅仅跨出第一小步，但它的确是第一步。”
“这第一步能解释给非数学家听吗？”
“我想可以。你也知道，夫铭，最初的时候，我将心理史学视为由两千五百万个世界的互动所决定的科学，每个世界的平均人口为十几亿。那实在太多了，我们根本没有办法处理这么复杂的情况。假使我想要成功，假使我想找到一个通往实用心理史学的途径，首先我得找到一个较简单的系统。
“所以我曾经想到，我应该回溯过去，首先处理一个单一的世界。在人类尚未殖民银河的鸿蒙时期，它是唯一有人类居住的世界。在麦曲生，他们提到一个名叫奥罗拉的起源世界；而在达尔，我听说了一个叫做地球的起源世界。我曾想到它们可能是同一个世界的两个名字，但至少在一个关键上，两者具有充分的差异，使这个假设变得不可能。不过这不重要，我们对两者都只知道一点点，这一点点又被神话和传说混淆，根本没有希望利用心理史学研究它们。”
他顿了一下，啜了口冰果汁，双眼仍紧盯着夫铭的脸庞。
夫铭说：“嗯？后来呢？”
“与此同时，铎丝对我讲了一个我称之为毛手毛脚的故事。它没有什么本质上的意义，只是一个全然普通的幽默轶事。不过，铎丝因而提到各地不同的性爱风俗，包括各个世界和川陀上的各区。这使我想到，她将川陀不同的行政区视为独立的世界。我无端冒出一个念头，我要处理的不只是两千五百万个不同的世界，而是两千五百万再加上八百个。但这似乎毫无差别，所以我立刻把它抛到脑后，未曾再去想。
“可是，当我从皇区转到斯璀璘再转到麦曲生再转到达尔再转到卫荷，我自己观察到每个区的差别有多大。这使我越来越有那种感觉——川陀不是一个世界，而是许多世界的复合体。不过，我仍未看到真正的关键。
“直到我听了芮喜尔的一席话——你看，我最后被卫荷抓到其实是件好事；芮喜尔的轻率驱使她实现宏图也是件好事，她把一切计划与我分享——我刚才要说的是，她告诉我说她要的只有川陀，以及邻近的几个世界而已。川陀本身就是一个帝国，她这么说，并对遥远的外星世界嗤之以鼻，将他们视为‘等于并不存在’。
“就是在那一刻，我看见了一定被我深藏在思想中好一段时间的灵感。川陀拥有格外复杂的社会结构，是由八百个小世界组成的一个人口众多的大世界。它本身就是一个足够复杂的系统，足以使得心理史学具有意义；可是跟整个帝国相比，它又足够简单，或许能使心理史学成为可行。
“至于那此外围世界，那两千五百万个世界呢？它们‘等于并不存在’。当然，它们会对川陀造成影响，也会受到川陀的影响，但那些是二阶效应。如果我能让心理史学成为对川陀本身的一阶的近似描述，那么外围世界的微小影响可在事后再加进来，作为一种二阶修正。你懂我的意思吗？我一直在寻找一个单一世界。以便在其上建立一个实用的心理史学，我不断在遥远的过去寻找，其实我要的那个世界始终都在我的脚下。”
夫铭带着明显的宽心与喜悦说：“太好了！”
“可是一切都有待努力，夫铭，我必须将川陀研究得足够仔细，我必须发明必要的数学处理它。如果我运气够好，可以活完这一辈子，也许能在去世之前找到答案。如果不行，我的后继者必须再接再厉。可以想象得到，在心理史学成为一个有用的理论之前，帝国或许已经衰亡与分裂。”
“我会尽一切力量帮你。”
“我知道。”谢顿说。
“这么说，你相信我——尽管我的真实身份是丹莫茨尔。”
“全然相信，绝对相信。不过我这么做，是因为你并非丹莫扶尔。”
“但我的确是啊！”夫铭坚持道。
“但你其实不是。跟你的真实身份比较起来，你丹莫茨尔的角色远不如夫铭这个身份。”
“你是什么意思？”夫铭睁大双眼，身了微微后仰。
“我的意思是说，你选择‘夫铭’这个名字，也许是出于一种自我解嘲的幽默感。‘夫铭’脱胎于‘人名’，是吗？”
夫铭未做出响应，他继续凝视着谢顿。
最后谢谢终于说：“因为你不是人，对不对，夫铭——或者丹莫茨尔？你是个机器人。”
Chapter 91
Hummin sat calmly, not a muscle twitching, still looking at Hari Seldon and Seldon, for his part, waited. It was Hummin, he thought, who should speak next.
Hummin did, but said merely, "A robot? Me?--By robot, I presume you mean an artificial being such as the object you saw in the Sacratorium in Mycogen."
"Not quite like that," said Seldon.
"Not metal? Not burnished? Not a lifeless simulacrum?" Hummin said it without any evidence of amusement.
"No. To be of artificial life is not necessarily to be made of metal. I speak of a robot indistinguishable from a human being in appearance.. "If indistinguishable, Hari, then how do you distinguish?"
"Not by appearance."
"Explain."
"Hummin, in the course of my flight from yourself as Demerzel, I heard of two ancient worlds, as I told you--Aurora and Earth. Each seemed to be spoken of as a first world or an only world. In both cases, robots were spoken of, but with a difference."
Seldon was staring thoughtfully at the man across the table, wondering if, in any way, he would give some sign that he was less than a man--or more. He said, "Where Aurora was in question, one robot was spoken of as a renegade, a traitor, someone who deserted the cause. Where Earth was in question, one robot was spoken of as a hero, one who represented salvation. Was it too much to suppose that it was the same robot?"
"Was it?" murmured Hummin.
"This is what I thought, Hummin. I thought that Earth and Aurora were two separate worlds, co-existing in time. I dont know which one preceded the other. From the arrogance and the conscious sense of superiority of the Mycogenians, I might suppose that Aurora was the original world and that they despised the Earthmen who derived from them--or who degenerated from them.
"On the other hand, Mother Rittah, who spoke to me of Earth, was convinced that Earth was the original home of humanity and, certainly, the tiny and isolated position of the Mycogenians in a whole galaxy of quadrillions of people who lack the strange Mycogenian ethos might mean that Earth was indeed the original home and that Aurora was the aberrant offshoot. I cannot tell, but I pass on to you my thinking, so that you will understand my final conclusions."
Hummin nodded. "I see what you are doing. Please continue."
"The worlds were enemies. Mother Rittah certainly made it sound so. When I compare the Mycogenians, who seem to embody Aurora, and the Dahlites, who seem to embody Earth, I imagine that Aurora, whether first or second, was nevertheless the one that was more advanced, the one that could produce more elaborate robots, even ones indistinguishable from human beings in appearance. Such a robot was designed and devised in Aurora, then. But he was a renegade, so he deserted Aurora. To the Earthpeople he was a hero, so he must have joined Earth. Why he did this, what his motives were, I cant say."
Hummin said, "Surely, you mean why it did this, what its motives were."
"Perhaps, but with you sitting across from me," said Seldon, "I find it difficult to use the inanimate pronoun. Mother Rittah was convinced that the heroic robot--her heroic robot--still existed, that he would return when he was needed. It seemed to me that there was nothing impossible in the thought of an immortal robot or at least one who was immortal as long as the replacement of worn-out parts was not neglected."
"Even the brain?" asked Hummin.
"Even the brain. I dont really know anything about robots, but I imagine a new brain could be re-recorded from the old.--And Mother Rittah hinted of strange mental powers.--I thought: It must be so. I may, in some ways, be a romantic, but I am not so much a romantic as to think that one robot, by switching from one side to the other, can alter the course of history. A robot could not make Earths victory sure, nor Auroras defeat certain--unless there was something strange, something peculiar about the robot."
Hummin said, "Does it occur to you, Hari, that you are dealing with legends, legends that may have been distorted over the centuries and the millennia, even to the extent of building a veil of the supernatural over quite ordinary events? Can you make yourself believe in a robot that not only seems human, but that also lives forever and has mental powers? Are you not beginning to believe in the superhuman?"
"I know very well what legends are and I am not one to be taken in by them and made to believe in fairy tales. Still, when they are supported by certain odd events that I have seen--and even experienced myself--"
"Such as?"
"Hummin, I met you and trusted you from the start. Yes, you helped me against those two hoodlums when you didnt need to and that predisposed me in your favor, since I didnt realize at the time that they were your hirelings, doing what you had instructed them to do.--But never mind that."
"No," said Hummin, a hint of amusement--finally--in his voice.
"I trusted you. I was easily convinced not to go home to Helicon and to make myself a wanderer over the face of Trantor. I believed everything you told me without question. I placed myself entirely in your hands. Looking back on it now, I see myself as not myself. I am not a person to be so easily led, yet I was. More than that, I did not even think it strange that I was behaving so far out of character."
"You know yourself best, Hari."
"It wasnt only me. How is it that Dors Venabili, a beautiful woman with a career of her own, should abandon that career in order to join me in my flight? How is it that she should risk her life to save mine, seeming to take on, as a kind of holy duty, the cask of protecting me and becoming single-minded in the process? Was it simply because you asked her to?"
"I did ask her to, Hari."
"Yet she does not strike me as the kind of person to make such a radical changeover in her life merely because someone asks her to. Nor could I believe it was because she had fallen madly in love with me at first sight and could not help herself. I somehow wish she had, but she seems quite the mistress of her emotional self, more--I am now speaking to you frankly--than I myself am with respect to her."
"She is a wonderful woman," said Hummin. "I dont blame you."
Seldon went on. "How is it, moreover, that Sunmaster Fourteen, a monster of arrogance and one who leads a people who are themselves stiff-necked in their own conceit, should be willing to take in tribespeople like Dors and myself and to treat us as well as the Mycogenians could and did? When we broke every rule, committed every sacrilege, how is it that you could still talk him into letting us go?
"How could you talk the Tisalvers, with their petty prejudices, into taking us in? How can you be at home everywhere in the world, be friends with everyone, influence each person, regardless of their individual peculiarities? For that matter, how do you manage to manipulate Cleon too? And if he is viewed as malleable and easily molded, then how were you able to handle his father, who by all accounts was a rough and arbitrary tyrant? How could you do all this?
"Most of all, how is it that Mannix IV of Wye could spend decades building an army without peer, one trained to be proficient in every detail, and yet have it fall apart when his daughter tries to make use of it? How could you persuade them to play the Renegade, all of them, as you have done?"
Hummin said, "Might this mean no more than that I am a tactful person used to dealing with people of different types, that I am in a position to have done favors for crucial people and am in a position to do additional favors in the future? Nothing I have done, it might seem, requires the supernatural."
"Nothing you have done? Not even the neutralization of the Wyan army?"
"They did not wish to serve a woman."
"They must have known for years that any time Mannix laid down his powers or any time he died, Rashelle would be their Mayor, yet they showed no signs of discontent--until you felt it necessary that they show it. Dors described you at one time as a very persuasive man. And so you are. More persuasive than any man could be. But you are not more persuasive than an immortal robot with strange mental powers might be.--Well, Hummin?"
Hummin said, "What is it you expect of me, Hari? Do you expect me to admit Im a robot? That I only look like a human being? That I am immortal? That I am a mental marvel?!"
Seldon leaned toward Hummin as he sat there on the opposite side of the table. "Yes, Hummin, I do. I expect you to tell me the truth and I strongly suspect that what you have just outlined is the truth. You, Hummin, are the robot that Mother Rittah referred to as Da-Nee, friend of Ba-Lee. You must admit it. You have no choice."
第九十一章
第十九部 铎丝
哈里•谢顿：……习惯上人们仅将哈里•谢顿与心理史学联想在一起，视之为拟人化的数学与社会变迁。他本人也鼓励这种倾向，这点毋庸置疑，因为在正式著作中，他从未透露解出心理史学各种问题的任何线索。
根据他所告诉我们的，他的思想跃进或许都是无中生有。
至于他曾摸索过的死胡同。或是曾经做过的错误转折，他始终没有让我们知道。
……他的私生活则是一片空白。有关他的双亲与手足，我们仅有很简单的信息。
众所周知，他的独子芮奇•谢顿是领养的，但过程如何却无人知晓。至于他的妻子，我们只知道有这个人存在。
显然，除了有关心理史学的事物，谢顿有意成为一个毫不起眼的人。仿佛在他的感觉中——或是想要造成一种感觉——他不曾活在世上，而只是心理史学的化身。
——《银河百科全书》


第九十一章
夫铭冷静地坐在那里，仍目不转睛地望着哈里•谢顿，没有任何一根肌肉在拙动。谢顿则耐心等待，他想，下一个可口的人应该是夫铭。
大铭终于开口，不过他只是说：“一个机器人？我？所谓的机器人，我猜你是指人造人，像你在麦曲生圣堂中见到的那种东西。”
“并非完全像那样。”谢顿说。
“不是金属制品？不会熠熠生辉？不是一个无生命的拟像？”犬铭的话中未透出一丝兴味。
“不，人工生命不一定只限于金属制品。我说的是外形上和人类无法区分的机器人。”
“假如无法区分，哈里，那你又如何区分呢？”
“不是借着外形。”
“解释一下。”
“夫铭，在我逃避你的另一个身份——丹莫茨尔的过程中，我听说了两个古老的世界，我告诉过你，就是奥罗拉和地球。它们似乎都被说成是第一个世界，或是唯一的世界。两者都提到了机器人，但其中有一点不同。”
谢顿若有所思地凝视着餐桌对面这名男子，寻思他是否会在任何方面显露某种迹象，显出他比人类少了点——或是多了点什么。“在奥罗拉的故事中，有个机器人被说成抛弃目标的变节者、叛徒。而在地球的故事中，有个机器人被说成拯救世人的英雄。假设这两者是同一个机器人会不会太不可思议？”
“它是吗？”夫铭喃喃问道。
“我是这么想的，夫铭。我想地球和奥罗拉是两个不同的世界，曾经同时存在。我不知道哪个在先，哪个在后。从麦曲生人的自大和优越感判断，我应该假设奥罗拉是起源世界，而他们所鄙视的地球人，则是衍生自他们——或是由他们退化而来。
“另一方面，瑞塔嬷嬷，就是跟我提到地球的人，却深信地球才是人类的故乡。当然，整个银河拥有万兆人口，只有麦曲生人拥有那种奇异的民族性，他们这种微小、封闭的地位，或许正代表地球的确是人类的故乡，而奥罗拉则是旁门左道的支系。我无法做出判断，但我将自己的思考过程告诉你，好让你能了解我最后的结论。”
夫铭点了点头：“我看得出你在做什么，请继续。”
“这两个世界是仇家，瑞塔嬷嬷的话听来绝对是这个意思。麦曲生人似乎是奥罗拉的化身，而达尔人似乎是地球的化身，在我比较这两族人的时候，我猜想奥罗拉不论是先是后，无论如何是个较先进的世界，能生产较精致的机器人，它们甚至在外形上无法和人类区分。所以说，那个机器人是在奥罗拉设计发明的。但他是个变节者，所以他遗弃了奥罗拉。对地球人而言，他则是个英雄，所以他必定加入了地球。他为什么那样做，他的动机是什么，我却说不出来。”
夫铭说：“当然，你的意思是‘它’为什么那样做，它的动机是什么。”
“或许吧，但有你坐在我对面，”谢顿说，“我发觉使用无生命代名词颇有困难。瑞塔嬷嬷深信那个英雄机器人——她的英雄机器人——至今仍旧存在，他会在必要的时刻重返人间。在我看来，想象一个不朽的机器人，或者只要不忘更换磨损零件即可不朽的机器人，是一件毫无困难的事。”
“甚至于头脑？”夫铭问道。
“甚至于头脑。我对机器人其实一点都不了解，但我想象新的头脑可从旧的那里录取所有的记录。瑞塔嬷嬷还暗示了一种奇异的精神力量，我就想到：一定是这样的。在某些方面，我也许是个浪漫的人，但我还不至于浪漫到会相信一个机器人在转换阵营后，就能改变历史的发展。一个机器人无法确定地球的胜利，也无法保证奥罗拉的败北——除非这个机器人有什么古怪，有什么奇特的能力，”
夫铭说：“你有没有想到过，哈里，你是在研究一些传说，可能经过数世纪、数千年扭曲的传说？它们甚至扭曲到了在相当普通的事件上，都筑起一重超自然帷幕的程度。你能让自己相信一个机器人不但酷似人类，而且，寿命无尽并具有精神力量吗？你这不是开始相信超人了吗？”
“我对于什么是传说知道得很清楚，我不会被它们欺骗，也不会相信什么童话故事。然而，当某些古怪事件支持它们，而那些事件是我亲眼目睹，甚至亲身经验时……”
“比如说？”
“夫铭，我和你不期而遇，打从一开始就信任你。没错，在你根本不需要介入时，你帮我对付那两个小流氓，使我对你产生好感，因为当时我不了解他们其实受雇于你，遵照你的指示办事——不过，那你不用介意。”
“我不会。”夫铭说，他的声音终于透出一丝兴味。
“我信任你。我很容易就被说服，决定不回赫利肯家乡，而让自己在川陀表面到处流浪。你告诉我的每件事，我都毫无疑问地照单全收。如今回想起来，我发现那简直不是我。我不是那么容易被牵着鼻子走的人，但我的表现就是那样。尤有甚者，我的行为虽然那么异常，我甚至不觉得有什么奇怪。”
“你最了解你自己，哈里。”
“不只是我而已，铎丝•凡纳比里又如何？她是个美丽的女子，拥有自己的职业，竟然为了陪我逃亡而放弃教职。她怎么会冒着生命危险拯救我？还把保护我视为一种神圣的使命，从头到尾始终如一？只是因为你要求她那么做吗？”
“我的确要求过她，哈里。”
“然而她给我的印象，并非那种仅仅由于某人要求她，就会做出生命中如此彻底转变的人。我也无法相信，这是因为她第一眼就疯狂地爱上我，从此再也无法自拔——虽然我多少有些希望这是真的。但她似乎相当能控制自己的感情，而我——我现在坦白跟你讲——我对她的感情却没那么容易控制。”
“她是个了不起的女性，”夫铭说，“我不怪你。”
谢顿继续说道：“此外，日主十四又如何？他是个自大狂，领导着一群顽固地拥抱自负幻想的人。他竟然愿意收容像铎丝和我这样的外族人，而且尽麦曲生人一切可能、一切力量款待我们。在我们违反了所有的规定、触犯了每一条亵渎罪之后，你如何仍能说服他将我们放走？
“堤沙佛一家既小气又充满偏见，你怎么能说服他们收留我们？你怎么能对这个世界各个角落那么熟悉，和每一个人交朋友，影响每一个人，不论他们有什么特殊的秉性？说到这一点，你怎么也有办法操纵克里昂？即使他可视为柔顺且具可塑性，那你又如何能应付他的父亲，他在任何方面都是个粗暴专横的暴君？你怎么能做到这一切？
“最重要的是，卫荷的曼尼克斯四世花了数十年的心血，建立起一支无敌的军队，各方面的训练都精良无比，但是当他的女儿试图动用时，它却立刻四分五裂？你怎么能劝说他们步你的后尘，让他们全部扮演起变节者？”
夫铭说：“这难道不能说是我的手腕圆滑，习惯于应付各种不同类型的人；我有能力施恩于重要人物，将来也有能力继续眷顺他们？我做的这一切，似乎都不需要超自然的力量。”
“你做的一切？甚至包括瓦解卫荷的军队？”
“他们不希望效忠一名女性。”
“过去许多年来，他们一定知道，不论曼尼克斯何时放下他的权力，或是不论他何时去世，芮喜尔立刻会成为他们的区长，但他们并未显露不满的迹象——直到你觉得有必要让他们显露出来。有一次，铎丝将你说成是个非常具有说服力的人。你的确如此，比任何‘人’都更具说眼力。但和一个具有奇异精神力量的不朽机器人相比，你的说服力不算什么——如何，夫铭？”
“你指望我说什么，哈里？你指望我承认自己是个机器人？只是外表看来像人类？我是不朽的？我是个金属的奇珍？”
谢顿将上半身凑向夫铭：“是的，夫铭，我就是这个意思。我指望你告诉我真相，而我强烈怀疑你刚说的那些就是真相。你，夫铭，就是瑞塔嬷嬷口中的那个机器人丹尼——贝雳的朋友。你必须承以，你无法回避。”
Chapter 92

It was as though they were sitting in a tiny Universe of their own. There, in the middle of Wye, with the Wyan army being disarmed by Imperial force, they sat quietly. There, in the midst of events that all of Trantor--and perhaps all the Galaxy--was watching, there was this small bubble of utter isolation within which Seldon and Hummin were playing their game of attack and defense--Seldon trying hard to force a new reality, Hummin making no move to accept that new reality. Seldon had no fear of interruption. He was certain that the bubble within which they sat had a boundary that could not be penetrated, that Hummins--no, the robots--powers would keep all at a distance till the game was over.
Hummin finally said, "You are an ingenious fellow, Hari, but I fail to see why I must admit that I am a robot and why I have no choice but to do so. Everything you say may be true as facts--your own behavior, Dorss behavior, Sunmasters, Tisalvers, the Wyan generals--all, all may have happened as you said, but that doesnt force your interpretation of the meaning of the events to be true. Surely, everything that happened can have a natural explanation. You trusted me because you accepted what I said; Dors felt your safety to be important because she felt psychohistory to be crucial, herself being a historian; Sunmaster and Tisalver were beholden to me for favors you know nothing of, the Wyan generals resented being ruled by a woman, no more. Why must we flee to the supernatural?"
Seldon said, "See here, Hummin, do you really believe the Empire to be falling and do you really consider it important that it not be allowed to do so with no move made to save it or, at the least, cushion its Fall?"
"I really do." Somehow Seldon knew this statement was sincere. "And you really want me to work out the details of psychohistory and you feel that you yourself cannot do it?"
"I lack the capability."
"And you feel that only I can handle psychohistory--even if I sometimes doubt it myself?"
"Yes."
"And you must therefore feel that if you can possibly help me in any way, you must."
"I do."
"Personal feelings--selfish considerations--could play no part?" A faint and brief smile passed over Hummins grave face and for a moment Seldon sensed a vast and arid desert of weariness behind Hummins quiet manner. "I have built a long career on paying no heed to personal feelings or to selfish considerations."
"Then I ask your help. I can work out psychohistory on the basis of Trantor alone, but I will run into difficulties. Those difficulties I may overcome, but how much easier it would be to do so if I knew certain key facts. For instance, was Earth or Aurora the first world of humanity or was it some other world altogether? What was the relationship between Earth and Aurora? Did either or both colonize the Galaxy? If one, why didnt the other? If both, how was the issue decided? Are there worlds descended from both or from only one? How did robots come to be abandoned? How did Trantor become the Imperial world, rather than another planet? What happened to Aurora and Earth in the meantime? There are a thousand questions I might ask right now and a hundred thousand that might arise as I go along. Would you allow me to remain ignorant, Hummin, and fail in my task when you could inform me and help me succeed?"
Hummin said, "If I were the robot, would I have room in my brain for all of twenty thousand years of history for millions of different worlds?"
"I dont know the capacity of robotic brains. I dont know the capacity of yours. But if you lack the capacity, then you must have that information which you cannot hold safely recorded in a place and in a way that would make it possible for you to call upon it. And if you have it and I need information, how can you deny and withhold it from me? And if you cannot withhold it from me, how can you deny that you are a robot--that robot the Renegade?"
Seldon sat back and took a deep breath. "So I ask you again: Are you that robot? If you want psychohistory, then you must admit it. If you still deny you are a robot and if you convince me you are not, then my chances at psychohistory become much, much smaller. It is up to you, then. Are you a robot? Are you Da-Nee?"
And Hummin said, as imperturbable as ever. "Your arguments are irrefutable. I am R. Daneel Olivaw. The R stands for robot. "
第九十二章
　　他们仿佛坐在仅由两人构成的小宇宙中。卫荷的军队已被帝国部队缴械，而在卫荷的心脏地带，他们平静地坐在那里。整个川陀——或许整个银河都在注视这个事件，而事件的中心却存在着一个完全与世隔绝的小泡沫，能让谢顿与夫铭在其中进行他们的攻守游戏——谢顿试着提出一个新的推断，而夫铭则准备否决。
谢顿不怕遭到干扰，他确定这个泡沫有个无法穿透的边界。在这场游戏结束前，夫铭的——不，这个机器人的力量，会将所有人挡在一定距离之外。
夫铭终于开口：“你是个聪明人，哈里，但我看不出我为何必须承认自己是个机器人，以及我为何无法回避。你说的每件事或许都是事实——你自己的行为、铎丝的行为、日主的、堤沙佛的、卫荷将军们的——一切的一切或许都如你所说，但这不等于你对这些事件的诠释就是事实。不用说，发生过的每一件事都有个自然的解释：你信任我，是因为你接受我的话；铎丝觉得你的安全很重要，是因为身为一位历史学家，她感到心理史学事关重大；日主和堤沙佛曾受过我的恩惠，其中的详情你一无所知；卫荷的将军们憎恨被一个女人统治，如此而已。我们为什么一定耍将这一切归于借超自然？”
谢顿说：“听好，夫铭，你真相信帝国正在衰亡吗？你真认为绝不能坐视，不可不进行拯救它的行动——或是至少减轻衰亡的冲击吗？”
“我的确这么想。”无论如何，谢顿知道这句话是真诚的。
“你真要我发展出心理史学的细节，你觉得自已无法做到？”
“我缺乏这个能力。”
“而你觉得只有我才能处理心理史学——即使我自己有时也怀疑这点？”
“是的。”
“那么你一定也会觉得，无论我碰到什么闻难，只要有可能，你都必须尽全力帮我。”
“我是这么想。”
“个人的感情——自我中心的考虑，不会造成任何影响？”
夫铭严肃的脸庞掠过一丝含糊而短暂的笑容，刹那间，谢顿察觉到，在夫铭沉稳的态度后面，隐藏着一大片疲惫、饥渴的荒漠。“长久以来，我一直不曾留意个人感情或自我中心的考虑。”
“那么我请求你帮助我。我可以仅以川陀为根据来发展心理史学，但这么做必定有很多困难。我或许能克服那些困难，但若能知道某些关键的事实，问题不知道会简单多少。譬如说，地球或奥罗拉是不是人类的第一个世界，或者那根本是另一个世界？地球和奥罗拉的关系如何？是否其中哪个或两者皆曾殖民银河？如果只有一个，另一个为什么没有？如果两者皆有，最后的结果如何？如今这些世界是源自两者或其中之一？机器人如何遭到废弃？川陀如何变成京畿世界，为什么不是别的行星？奥罗拉和地球后来发生了什么变故？现在我就可能提出一千个问题，而在我的研究过程中，还可能冒诚十万个问题来。在你能为我提供答案，帮助我成功的时候，夫铭，你会让我始终懵懵懂懂，而眼睁睁看我失败吗？”
夫铭说：“假使我真是那个机器人，我的脑子可能会有足够空间，能贮存千万个不同的世界、整整两万年的所有历史吗？”
“我不知道机器人的脑容量有多少，我也不知道你的脑子可容纳多少记忆。但是如果容量不够，你一定已将那些无法安然保存的数据录在别处，而且有办法随时查取。如果你拥有它，我又需要那些数据，你怎能拒绝而对我有所保留？假使你不会对我有所保留，你又怎能拒绝承认自己是个机器人——那个机器人——那个变节者？”
谢顿靠回椅子上，深深吸了一口气：“所以我再问你一遍：你是不是那个机器人？你若是要心理史学，你就必须承认。如果你仍旧否认你是个机器人，如果你使我相信你不是，那我完成心理史学的机会将小得太多太多，所以，一切看你了。你是个机器人吗？你就是丹尼吗？”
夫铭以一如往昔的泰然口吻说：“你的论点无懈可击。我名叫Ｒ•丹尼尔•奥利瓦，其中‘Ｒ’便代表机器人。”
Chapter 93

R. Daneel Olivaw still spoke quietly, but it seemed to Seldon that there was a subtle change in his voice, as though he spoke more easily now that he was no longer playing a part.
"In twenty thousand years," said Daneel, "no one has guessed I was a robot when it was not my intention to have him or her know. In part, that was because human beings abandoned robots so long ago that very few remember that they even existed at one time. And in part, it is because I do have the ability to detect and affect human emotion. The detection offers no trouble, but to affect emotion is difficult for me for reasons having to do with my robotic nature--although I can do it when I wish. I have the ability but must deal with my will not to use it. I try never to interfere except when I have no choice but to do so. And when I do interfere, it is rarely that I do more than strengthen, as little as I can, what is already there. If I can achieve my purposes without doing even so much, I avoid it.
"It was not necessary to tamper with Sunmaster Fourteen in order to have him accept you--I call it tampering, you notice, because it is not a pleasant thing to do. I did not have to tamper with him because he did owe me for favors rendered and he is an honorable man, despite the peculiarities you found in him. I did interfere the second time, when you had committed sacrilege in his eyes, but it took very little. He was not anxious to hand you over to the Imperial authorities, whom he does not like. I merely strengthened the dislike a trifle and he handed you over to my care, accepting the arguments I offered, which otherwise he might have considered specious.
"Nor did I tamper with you noticeably. You distrusted the Imperials too. Most human beings do these days, which is an important factor in the decay and deterioration of the Empire. Whats more, you were proud of psychohistory as a concept, proud of having thought of it. You would not have minded having it prove to be a practical discipline. That would have further fed your pride." Seldon frowned and said, "Pardon me, Master Robot, but I am not aware that I am quite such a monster of pride."
Daneel said mildly, "You are not a monster of pride at all. You are perfectly aware that [it] is neither admirable nor useful to be driven by pride, so you try to subdue that drive, but you might as well disapprove of having yourself powered by your heartbeat. You cannot help either fact. Though you hide your pride from yourself for the sake of your own peace of mind, you cannot hide it from me. It is there, however carefully you mask it over. And I had but to strengthen it a touch and you were at once willing to take measures to hide from Demerzel, measures that a moment before you would have resisted. And you were eager to work at psychohistory with an intensity that a moment before you would have scorned.
"I saw no necessity to touch anything else and so you have reasoned out your robothood. Had I foreseen the possibility of that, I might have stopped it, but my foresight and my abilities are not infinite. Nor am I sorry now that I failed, for your arguments are good ones and it is important that you know who I am and that I use what I am to help you.
"Emotions, my dear Seldon are a powerful engine of human action, far more powerful than human beings themselves realize, and you cannot know how much can be done with the merest touch and how reluctant I am to do it."
Seldon was breathing heavily, trying to see himself as a man driven by pride and not liking it. "Why reluctant?"
"Because it would be so easy to overdo. I had to stop Rashelle from converting the Empire into a feudal anarchy. I might have bent minds quickly and the result might well have been a bloody uprising. Men are men--and the Wyan generals are almost all men. It does not actually take much to rouse resentment and latent fear of women in any man. It may be a biological matter that I, as a robot, cannot fully understand.
"I had but to strengthen the feeling to produce a breakdown in her plans. If I had done it the merest millimeter too much, I would have lost what I wanted--a bloodless takeover. I wanted nothing more than to have them not resist when my soldiers arrived."
Daneel paused, as though trying to pick his words, then said, "I do not wish to go into the mathematics of my positronic brain. It is more than I can understand, though perhaps not more than you can if you give it enough thought. However, I am governed by the Three Laws of Robotics that are traditionally put into words--or once were, long ago. They are these:
" One. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm.
" Two. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings, except where such orders would conflict with the First Law.
" Three. A robot must protect its own existence, as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Law.
"But I had a ... a friend twenty thousand years ago. Another robot. Not like myself. He could not be mistaken for a human being, but it was he who had the mental powers and it was through him that I gained mine. "It seemed to him that there should be a still more general rule than any of the Three Laws. He called it the Zeroth Law, since zero comes before one. It is:
" Zero. A robot may not injure humanity or, through inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.
"Then the First Law must read:
" One. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm, except where that would conflict with the Zeroth Law.
"And the other laws must be similarly modified. Do you understand?"
Daneel paused earnestly and Seldon said, "I understand." Daneel went on. "The trouble is, Hari, that a human being is easy to identify. I can point to one. It is easy to see what will harm a human being and what wont--relatively easy, at least. But what is humanity? To what can we point when we speak of humanity? And how can we define harm to humanity? When will a course of action do more good than harm to humanity as a whole and how can one tell? The robot who first advanced the Zeroth law died--became permanently inactive--because he was forced into an action that he felt would save humanity, yet which he could not be sure would save humanity. And as he became inactivated, he left the care of the Galaxy to me.
"Since then, I have tried. I have interfered as little as possible, relying on human beings themselves to judge what was for the good. They could gamble; I could not. They could miss their goals; I did not dare. They could do harm unwittingly; I would grow inactive if I did. The Zeroth Law makes no allowance for unwitting harm.
"But at times I am forced to take action. That I am still functioning shows that my actions have been moderate and discreet. However, as the Empire began to fail and to decline, I have had to interfere more frequently and for decades now I have had to play the role of Demerzel, trying to run the government in such a way as to stave off ruin--and yet I will function, you see.
"When you made your speech to the Decennial Convention, I realized at once that in psychohistory there was a tool that might make it possible to identify what was good and bad for humanity. With it, the decisions we would make would be less blind. I would even trust to human beings to make those decisions and again reserve myself only for the greatest emergencies. So I arranged quickly to have Cleon learn of your speech and call you in. Then, when I heard your denial of the worth of psychohistory, I was forced to think of some way to make you try anyway. Do you understand, Hari?"
More than a little daunted, Seldon said, "I understand, Hummin."
"To you, I must remain Hummin on those rare occasions when I will be able to see you. I will give you what information I have if it is something you need and in my persona as Demerzel I will protect you as much as I can. As Daneel, you must never speak of me."
"I wouldnt want to," said Seldon hurriedly. "Since I need your help, it would ruin matters to have your plans impeded."
"Yes, I know you wouldnt want to." Daneel smiled wearily. "After all, you are vain enough to want full credit for psychohistory. You would not want anyone to know--ever--that you needed the help of a robot."
Seldon flushed. "I am not--"
"But you are, even if you carefully hide it from yourself. And it is important, for I am strengthening that emotion within you minimally so that you will never be able to speak of me to others. It will not even occur to you that you might do so."
Seldon said, "I suspect Dors knows--"
"She knows of me. And she too cannot speak of me to others. Now that you both know of my nature, you can speak of me to each other freely, but not to anyone else."
Daneel rose.--Hari, I have my work to do now. Before long, you and Dors will be taken back to the Imperial Sector--"
"The boy Raych must come with me. I cannot abandon him. And there is a young Dahlite named Yugo Amaryl--"
"I understand. Raych will be taken too and you can do with any friend as you will. You will all be taken care of appropriately. And you will work on psychohistory. You will have a staff. You will have the necessary computers and reference material. I will interfere as little as possible and if there is resistance to your views that does not actually reach the point of endangering the mission, then you will have to deal with it yourself."
"Wait, Hummin," said Seldon urgently. "What if, despite all your help and all my endeavors, it turns out that psychohistory cannot be made into a practical device after all? What if I fail?"
Daneel rose. "In that case, I have a second plan in hand. One I have been working on a long time on a separate world in a separate way. It too is very difficult and to some ways even more radical than psychohistory. It may fail too, but there is a greater chance of success if two roads are open than if either one alone was.
"Take my advice, Hari! If the time comes when you are able to set up some device that may act to prevent the worst from happening see if you can think of two devices, so that if one fails, the other will carry on. The Empire must be steadied or rebuilt on a new foundation. Let there be two such, rather than one, if that is possible."
He rose, "Now I must return to my ordinary work and you must turn to yours. You will be taken care of."
With one final nod, he rose and left.
Seldon looked after him and said softly, "First I must speak to Dors."

第九十三章
　　Ｒ•丹尼尔•奥利瓦的口气仍然平静沉稳，但在谢顿的感觉中，他的声音似乎有了微妙的变化，仿佛一旦不用扮演什么角色，他开口就更容易了。
“两万年以来，”丹尼尔说，“只要我不打算让别人知道，从来没有人能猜到我是个机器人。原因之一，是因为人类早已舍弃机器人，甚至很少有人记得它们曾经存在。此外，也因为我的确具有侦测和影响人类情感的能力。其中侦测没有什么问题，但对我而言，影响情感却是件困难的事，这和我的机器人本质有关。不过当我希望那样做的时候，我还是能做到。我拥有那种能力，并得和持反对立场的心意交战。我试着绝不轻易干预——除非在我毫无选择的情况下；当我必须插手干预时，也几乎只是增强既有的情感。而且尽可能越少越好。假如甚至连这一点都不需要，也能达到我的目的，我就会避免那样做。
“要让日主十四接纳你们，并无必要对他进行干涉——我管它叫‘干涉’，你该注意到了，因为那不是一件愉快的事。我不必干涉他，因为他的确欠我的情，而他是个荣誉至上的人。尽管你发现他有许多怪癖。当你犯了他眼中的亵渎罪时，我的确出手干预了，但程度相当小。他不急于将你们交给帝国当局，他不喜欢那些人。我只是将这种厌恶稍微加强，他便将你们交由我看管，并接受我提出的说法。换成另一种情况，他可能会将那些话当做似是而非的言论。
“我也未曾对你进行多么显著的干涉。你同样不信任帝国当局，如今大多数人都一样，这是帝国衰败和倾颓的一个重要因素。非但如此，你还对心理史学这个概念引以为自豪——因为自己能想到它而感到骄傲。你不介意去证明它是个实用的学科，这样做会让你感到更加骄傲。”
谢顿皱了皱眉头，说道：“对不起，机器人阁下，我不晓得自己是个如此骄傲的怪兽。”
丹尼尔温和地说：“你绝不是骄傲的怪兽。你完全了解被骄傲驱动不值得恭维也毫无用处，所以你努力抑制那种驱动力；但你同样大可否认心跳是你的动力源，这两者都是你无法做主的。虽然你为了内心的平静，将你的骄傲藏在自己找不到的地方，你却无法对我隐藏。它就在那里，不论你遮掩得多么仔细。我只要稍微将它加强一点，你就立刻愿意采取躲避丹莫茨尔的行动，而在前一刻，你还会抗拒那些行动。你也随即渴望集中全力发展心理史学，而在前一刻，你还对它嗤之以鼻。
“我认为没有必要碰触其他情感，所以才让你推出了你的机器人论。假使我预见这个可能性，我或许会阻止，但我的先见之明和我的能力并非无限。我也不会对如今的失败感到后悔，因为你的论点都很有道理。让你知道我是谁，以及让我以本来面目帮助你，都是非常重要的事。情感，亲爱的谢顿，是人类行动的一个强大动力，远比人类自已所了解的更为强大。你无法明白轻轻一碰能达到多大效果，以及我多不情愿这样做。”
谢顿的呼吸变得沉重，他试着将自己视为一个被骄傲驱动的人，而他不喜欢这种感觉：“为何不情愿？”
“因为很容易会做过头。早先，我必须阻止芮喜尔将帝国转变成封建式的无政府状态。我可以迅速扭转人心，但结果很可能是一场血腥的叛乱。男人毕竟就是男人——而卫荷的将领大多数是男人，想在任何男人心中挑起对女性的仇恨和潜在的恐惧，其实不必花太大工夫。这也许是个生物学的问题，我，身为一个机器人，无法全然了解。
“我需要做的只是增强那种感觉，好让她的计划自行崩溃。即使我做得仅仅多出一厘米，我也会失去我想要的——一次不流血的接收。我要的只是让他们在我的战士来到时不要抵抗，如此而已。”
丹尼尔顿了一下，仿佛在斟酌他的遣词用字，然后又说：“我不希望讨论和我的正电子脑相关的数学，它在我的理解之外，不过假使你花上足够心思，它也许并未超过你的能力范围。无论如何，我还是受到‘机器人三大法则’的支配。传统上它们以文字表述——或是很久以前曾经如此。它们的内容是：
一、机器人不得伤害人类，也不得因为不采取行动而使人类受到伤害。
二、除非违背第一法则，否则机器人必须服从人类的命令。
三、在不违背第一法则及第二法则的情况下，机器人必须保护自身的存在。
不过，两万年前我有一个……一个朋友，另一个机器人。他和我不同，不会被误认为人类。但拥有精神力量的是他，而且是经由他，我才获得了自己的精神力量。
在他的感觉中，似乎应该有个比三大法则更具一般性的规定。他称之为第○法则，因为○在一前面。它的内容是：
机器人不得伤害人类整体，也不得因为不采取行动而使人类整体受到伤害。
然后，第一法则必须变成：
一、除非违背第○法则，机器人不得伤害人类，也不得因为不采取行动而使人类受到伤害。
其他两个法则也必须做类似修正。你明白吗？”
丹尼尔满怀期待地停下来，谢顿接口道：“我明白。”
丹尼尔继续说：“问题是，哈里，一个人容易指认，我可以随手指出来。我们不难看出什么会、什么不会伤害一个人——至少，相对而言并不困难。但什么是人类整体呢？在我们提到人类整体时，我们指的是什么？我们怎样才能定义对人类整体的伤害？一个行动方针如何才会对人类裢体有益无害，我们又如何分辨？首先提出第○法则的那个机器人死了——变得永远停摆，因为他被迫进行一项他感到会拯救人类整体的行动，却又无法确定它会拯救人类整体。当他停摆之际，他将照顾银河的责任留给了我。
“从那时候开始，我一直努力尝试。我尽可能做最小的干预，仅靠人类自己判断什么是好的。他们可以赌，我却不能；他们可以失误，我却不敢；他们可以无意间造成伤害，若是我则会停摆。第○法则不允许任何失误。
“但有时我还是被迫采取行动。我依旧运作如常的这个事实，显示我的行动始终适度和谨慎。然而，在帝国开始没落衰微之后，我不得不干预得较为频繁；而过去数十年间，我不得不扮演丹莫茨尔这个角色，试着经营这个政府，帮它逃过覆亡的命运——但我运作如常，你看到了。
“你在十年会议上发表演说后，我立刻了解心理史学中藏有一个工具，或许能辨认出什么行动对人类整体有益或有害。在它的帮助下，我们不会再那么盲目地下决定。我甚至能放手让人类自行做出决定，只须在最紧急的危机时刻才介入。因此我很快做出安排，让克里昂知晓你的演说并召见你。然后，当我听到你否认心理史学的价值时，我被迫想出另一个办法，好歹要让你继续尝试。你明白吗，哈里？”
谢顿感到兹事体大，不觉有些惶恐：“我明白，夫铭。”
“今后对你而言，在我能见到你的少数机会中，我的身份将仍是夫铭。我会给你我所有的一切数据，只要那是你需要的。而在我的丹莫茨尔身份之下，我会尽我的一切力量保护你。至于丹尼尔这个身份，你以后绝对不能提起。”
“我不会那样做，”谢顿连忙说道，“因为我需要你的帮助，让你的计划受阻会坏了我的大事。”
“没错，我知道你不会那样做。”丹尼尔露出疲倦的微笑，“毕竟你十分自负，想要占有心理史学的全部功劳。你不会想——绝不会想让任何人知道，你曾经需要一个机器人的帮助。”
谢顿涨红了脸：“我不是……”
“但你的确是——即使你将它仔细隐藏起来，不让自己看见。这点相当重要，因为我正在将你的这种情感稍稍推强，使你绝不会对别人提到我。你甚至不会有想说出来的念头。”
谢顿说：“我想铎丝知道……”
“她知道我的身份，她同样不能对别人提到我。既然你们两人都已知道我的真面目，你们相互间可以随意提起我，但不可以对别人说。”
丹尼尔提高音量说：“哈里，我现在要忙别的工作。不久之后，你和铎丝会被带回皇区……”
“芮奇那孩子一定要跟我走，我不能遗弃他。此外还有个名叫雨果•阿马瑞尔的年轻达尔人……”
“我明白。芮奇也会被带回去，你还可以带着你喜欢的任何朋友，你们都会得到适当的照顾。你将投入心理史学的研究，你会有一组人，会有必需的计算机和参考资料。我将尽可能不加干预，假如你的计划受到阻碍，却未真正达到危及这项任务的程度，那么你得自行设法解决。”
“慢着，夫铭，”谢顿急切地说，“如果说，虽然有你的鼎力相助，以及我的全力以赴，心理史学终究无法成为一个实用的机制呢？我要是失败了怎么办？”
丹尼尔再度提高音量：“这样的话，我手中还有第二套计划。我已经在另一个世界，以另一个方法进行了很久。它同样非常困难，就某些方面而言，甚至比心理史学更为激进。它也可能失败，但我们面前若有两条路，总会比单独一条带有更大的成功机会。
“接受我的忠告，哈里！假如有朝一日，你真能建立起某种机制，有可能借以防止最坏的情况发生，看看你是否能想出两套机制，如此则万一其中之一失败，另外一个仍能继续。帝国必须稳定下来，或是重建在一个新的基础上。建立两个这样的基础吧，不要只有一个——假如可能的话。”
他再度提高音量：“现在我必须返回我的普通角色，而你必须回到你的工作岗位。你会被照顾得很好。”
他最后一次点点头，随即起身离去。
谢顿望着他的背影，喃喃说道：“我得先找铎丝谈谈。”
Chapter 94

Dors said, "The palace is cleared. Rashelle will not be physically harmed. And youll return to the Imperial Sector, Hari."
"And you, Dors?" said Seldon in a low tight voice.
"I presume I will go back to the University," she said. "My work is being neglected, my classes abandoned.""No, Dors, you have a greater task."
"What is that?"
"Psychohistory. I cannot tackle the project without you."
"Of course you can. I am a total illiterate in mathematics."
"And I in history--and we need both."
Dors laughed. "I suspect that, as a mathematician, you are one of a kind. I, as a historian, am merely adequate, certainly not outstanding. You will find any number of historians who will suit the needs of psychohistory better than I do."
"In that case, Dors, let me explain that psychohistory needs more than a mathematician and a historian. It also needs the will to tackle what will probably be a lifetime problem. Without you, Dors, I will not have that will."
"Of course youll have it."
"Dors, if youre not with me, I dont intend to have it."
Dors looked at Seldon thoughtfully. "This is a fruitless discussion, Hari. Undoubtedly, Hummin will make the decision. If he sends me back to the University."
"He wont."
"How can you be sure?"
"Because Ill put it to him plainly. If he sends you back to the University, Ill go back to Helicon and the Empire can go ahead and destroy itself."
"You cant mean it."
"But I certainly do."
"Dont you realize that Hummin can arrange to have your feelings change so that you will work on psychohistory--even without me?"
Seldon shook his head. "Hummin will not make such an arbitrary decision. Ive spoken to him. He dares not do much to the human mind because he is bound by what he calls the Laws of Robotics. To change my mind to the point where I will not want you with me, Dors, would mean a change of the kind he can not risk. On the other hand, if he leaves me alone and if you join me in the project, he will have what he wants--a true chance at psychohistory. Why should he not settle for that?"
Dors shook her head. "He may not agree for reasons of his own."
"Why should he disagree? You were asked to protect me, Dors. Has Hummin canceled that request?"
"No."
"Then he wants you to continue your protection. And I want your protection."
"Against what? You now have Hummins protection, both as Demerzel and as Daneel, and surely that is all you need."
"If I had the protection of every person and every force in the Galaxy, it would still be yours I would want."
"Then you dont want me for psychohistory. You want me for protection."
Seldon scowled. "No! Why are you twisting my words? Why are you forcing me to say what you must know? It is neither psychohistory nor protection I want you for. Those are excuses and Ill use any other I need. I want you--just you. And if you want the real reason, it is because you are you."
"You dont even know me."
"That doesnt matter. I dont care.--And yet I do know you in a way. Better than you think."
"Do you indeed?"
"Of course. You follow orders and you risk your life without hesitation and with no apparent care for the consequences. You learned how to play tennis so quickly. You learned how to use knives even more quickly and you handled yourself perfectly in the fight with Marron. Inhumanly--if I may say so. Your muscles are amazingly strong and your reaction time is amazingly fast. You can somehow tell when a room is being eavesdropped and you can be in touch with Hummin in some way that does not involve instrumentation."
Dors said, "And what do you think of all that?"
"It has occurred to me that Hummin, in his persona as R. Daneel Olivaw, has an impossible task. How can one robot try to guide the Empire? He must have helpers."
"That is obvious. Millions, I should imagine. I am a helper. You are a helper. Little Raych is a helper."
"You are a different kind of helper."
"In what way? Hari, say it. If you hear yourself say it, you will realize how crazy it is."
Seldon looked long at her and then said in a low voice, "I will not say it because ... I dont care."
"You really dont? You wish to take me as I am?"
"I will take you as I must. You are Dors and, whatever else you are, in all the world I want nothing else."
Dors said softly, "Hari, I want what is good for you because of what I am, but I feel that if I wasnt what I am, I would still want what is good for you. And I dont think I am good for you."
"Good for me or bad, I dont care." Here Hari looked down as he paced a few steps, weighing what he would say next. "Dors, have you ever been kissed?"
"Of course, Hari. Its a social part of life and I live socially."
"No, no! I mean, have you ever really kissed a man? You know, passionately?"
"Well yes, Hari, I have."
"Did you enjoy it?"
Dors hesitated. She said, "When Ive kissed in that way, I enjoyed it more than I would have enjoyed disappointing a young man I liked, someone whose friendship meant something to me." At this point, Dors blushed and she turned her face away. "Please, Hari, this is difficult for me to explain."
But Hari, more determined now than ever, pressed further. "So you kissed for the wrong reasons, then, to avoid hurt feelings."
"Perhaps everyone does, in a sense."
Seldon mulled this over, then said suddenly, "Did you ever ask to be kissed?"
Dors paused, as though looking back on her life. "No."
"Or wish to be kissed again, once you had?"
"No."
"Have you ever slept with a man?" he asked softly, desperately.
"Of course. I told you. These things are a part of life."
Hari gripped her shoulders as if he was going to shake her. "But have you ever felt the desire, a need for that kind of closeness with just one special person? Dors, have you ever felt love."
Dors looked up slowly, almost sadly, and locked eyes with Seldon. "Im sorry, Hari, but no."
Seldon released her, letting his arms fall dejectedly to his sides. Then Dors placed her hand gently on his arm and said, "So you see, Hari. Im not really what you want."
Seldons head drooped and he stared at the floor. He weighed the matter and tried to think rationally. Then he gave up. He wanted what he wanted and he wanted it beyond thought and beyond rationality. He looked up.
"Dors, dear, even so, I dont care." Seldon put his arms around her and brought his head close to hers slowly, as though waiting for her to pull away, all the while drawing her nearer.
Dors made no move and he kissed her--slowly, lingeringly, and then passionately--and her arms suddenly tightened around him. When he stopped at last, she looked at him with eyes that mirrored her smile and she said:
"Kiss me again, Hari. Please."

The End
第九十四章
　　铎丝说：“官邸已经彻底扫荡，芮喜尔不会受到实质伤害。而你将回到皇区去。哈里。”
“你呢，铎丝？”谢顿以低沉而紧张的声音说。
“我想我会回大学去。”她说，“我的工作荒置了，我教的课也没人管。”
“不，铎丝，你有更重大的工作。”
“什么工作？”
“心理史学，没有你，我无法进行这个计划。”
“你当然可以，我对数学完全是文盲。”
“而我对历史也是——我们同时需要这两者。”
铎丝哈哈大笑：“在我看来，身为数学家，你举世无双。而我这个历史学家，只不过刚好及格，绝对不算杰出。比我更适合心理史学需要的历史学家，你要多少就能找到多少。”
“如果你这样认为的话．铎丝，让我解释一下。心理史学需要的不只是一个数学家和一个历史学家，它还需要一种意志，来勇敢面对这个可能要钻研一辈子的问题。铎丝，没有你，我不会有那种意志。”
“你当然会有。”
“铎丝，如果你不跟我在一起，我不打算要有那种意志。”
铎丝若有所思地望着谢顿：“这是个不会有结果的讨论，哈里。毋庸置疑，夫铭将做出决定。假如他决定送我回大学……”
“他不会的。”
“你怎能肯定？”
“因为我会跟他说明白，如果他送你回大学，我就要回到赫利肯，帝国大可以继续走向自我毁灭的终点。”
“你不可能是说真的。”
“但我说的确实是真的。”
“难道你不了解，夫铭可以使你的情感产生变化，这样你就会愿意研究心理史学——即使没有我？”
谢顿摇了摇头：“夫铭不会那么武断。我跟他谈过，他不敢对人类心灵做太多手脚，因为他受到他所谓机器人法则的束缚。而改变我的心灵，使我不再想要跟你在一起，正是他无法冒险从事的那种改变。话说回来．如果他不干涉我，如果你加入我的计划，他会得到他所要的——心理史学成功的真正机会。他为什么不该满意呢？”
铎丝摇了摇头：“也许由于某些他自己的理由，他会不同意这样做。”
“他为什么要不同意？你受他之托来保护我，这个托付被取消了吗？”
“没有。”
“那么他就是要你继续保护我，而我也需要要你的保护。”
“保护什么呢？你现在已有夫铭的保护——同时以丹莫茨尔和丹尼尔的身份。对你当然足够了。”
“即使我拥有银河中每一个人、每一份力量，我仍只要你的保护。”
“那么你要我不是为了心理史学，你要我是为了保护你。”
谢顿面露不悦之色：“不！为什么你一直曲解我的话？为什么你要逼我说出你一定明白的事？我要你既不是为了心理史学，也不是为了保护我。那些都只是借口，必要的话，我还会用到其他任何借口。我要的是你——只是你。如果你要真正的理由，那是因为你就是你。”
“你甚至不了解我。”
“那不重要，我不在乎——但就某方面而言，我的确可说了解你，比你想象中还了解的多。”
“真的吗？”
“当然。你是那么听命行事，你为我甘冒生命危险，从来不曾迟疑，看来好像不顾一切后果。你学习网球的速度那么快，你学习使用双刀甚至更快，而在和玛隆的激战中，你表现得完美无缺。简直不像个人——如果我能这么说。你的肌肉结实得出奇，你的瞬间反应快得惊人。当一个房间遭到窃听，你就是有办法看出来。而且你能以某种方式跟夫铭保持联络，根本不必使用任何仪器。”
铎丝说：“从这些你推出来什么结论？”
“这使我想到，夫铭在他的机•丹尼尔•奥利瓦身份之下，进行着一件不可能的任务。一个机器人怎么可能照管整个帝国？他一定有些帮手。”
“那是显然的事。可能有好几百万，我这么猜想。我是个帮手，你是个帮手，小芮奇也是个帮手。”
“你是个不一样的帮手。”
“哪里不一样？哈里，说出来。假如你听到自己说出的话，你将了解它有多么疯狂。”
谢顿对她凝视良久，然后低声说道：“我不会说出来，因为……我不存乎。”
“真的不在乎？你愿意接受真正的我？”
“我会接受我必须接受的你。不论你是什么，你还是铎丝，在这个世上我别无所求。”
铎丝柔声说道：“哈里，因为我是铎丝，所以我要你得到最好的；但即使我不是铎丝，我仍会希望你得到最好的。而我不认为自己对你有什么好。”
“对我是好是坏，我并不在乎。”说到这里，谢顿踱了几步，低下头来，揣度着即将说出口的话。“铎丝，你曾被吻过吗？”
“当然，哈里。那是社会生活的一部分，而我活在社会中。”
“不，不！我的意思是说，你真正吻过一个男人吗？你知道——热情地！”
“嗯，有的。哈里，我做过。”
“你喜欢吗？”
铎丝犹豫了一下：“当我那样吻的时候，我喜欢它的原因，是因为我更不喜欢让一个我喜爱的、他的友谊对我有些意义的年轻男子失望。”说到这里，铎丝的双颊绯红，赶紧将脸别过去。“拜托，哈里，要我解释这种事并不容易。”
但此刻的谢顿比以往任何时候更为坚决，他毫不放松地继续逼近：“所以说，你是为了错误的理由，为了避免伤害某人的感情而吻。”
“也许每个人都是这样，就某种意义而言，”
谢顿将这句话咀嚼了一番，又突然说：“你曾经要求别人吻你吗？”
铎丝顿了一下，仿佛在回顾她的一生：“没有。”
“或者希望再被吻一次，在你被吻过之后？”
“没有。”
“你曾经跟男人睡过觉吗？”他绝望地轻声问道。
“当然有，我告诉过你，这些事情是生活的一部分。”
谢顿紧紧抓住她的双肩，似乎是要摇晃她：“但你曾经感到那种欲望吗，只和一个特别的人有那种亲密关系的需要？铎丝，你曾经感受过爱吗？”
铎丝缓缓地，几乎伤感地抬起头来，目光与谢顿的锁在一起。“我很抱歉，哈里，我没有。”
谢顿放开她，让自己的双臂颓然垂到身子两侧。
接着，铎丝将一只手轻柔地放到他的肩上。“所以你看，哈里，我不是你真正想要的。”
谢顿垂下头来，双眼瞪着地板。他衡量着这一切，试着理性地思考。然后，他放弃了，他只要他想要的，而他的向往超越了思考与理件。
他抬起头来：“铎丝，亲爱的，即使如此，我还是不在乎。”
谢顿用双臂搂住她，缓缓将头凑过去，仿佛等着她随时抽身，但却将她越搂越紧。
铎丝没有任何动作，于是他吻了她——先是慢慢地、流连地，接着是热情地。她的双臂突然紧紧环抱住他。
等到他终于停下来，她凝望着他，双眼中映着笑意。
她说：“再吻我一次，哈里——拜托。”
